The Second Book, Entitled 
EUTERPE 




I. On the death of Cyrus, Cambyses his son by 
Cassandane daughter of Pharnaspes took the 
kingdom. Cassandane had died in the lifetime 
of Cyrus, who had made a great mourning for 
her at her death, and had commanded all the 
subjects of his empire to observe the like. Cam¬ 
byses, the son of this lady and of Cyrus, regard¬ 
ing the Ionian and ^olian Greeks as vassals of 
his father, took them with him in his expedi¬ 
tion against Egypt among the other nations 
which owned his sway. 

2. Now the Egyptians, before the reign of 
their king Psammetichus, believed themselves 
to be the most ancient of mankind. Since Psam¬ 
metichus, however, made an attempt to discov¬ 
er who were actually the primitive race, they 
have been of opinion that while they surpass 
all other nations, the Phrygians surpass them 
in antiquity. This king, finding it impossible to 
make out by dint of inquiry what men were 
the most ancient, contrived the following meth¬ 
od of discovery:—He took two children of the 
common sort, and gave them over to a herds¬ 
man to bring up at his folds, strictly charging 
him to let no one utter a word in their pres¬ 
ence, but to keep them in a sequestered cot¬ 
tage, and from time to time introduce goats to 
their apartment, see that they got their fill of 
milk, and in all other respects look after them. 
His object herein was to know, after the indis¬ 
tinct babblings of infancy were over, what 
word they would first articulate. It happened 
as he had anticipated. The herdsman obeyed 
his orders for two years, and at the end of that 
time, on his one day opening the door of their 
room and going in, the children both ran up to 
him with outstretched arms, and distinctly said 
“Becos.” When this first happened the herds¬ 
man took no notice; but afterwards when he 
observed, on coming often to see after them, 
that the word was constantly in their mouths, 
he informed his lord, and by his command 


brought the children into his presence. Psam¬ 
metichus then himself heard them say the 
word, upon which he proceeded to make in¬ 
quiry what people there was who called any¬ 
thing “becos,” and hereupon he learnt that 
“becos” was the Phrygian name for bread. In 
consideration of this circumstance the Egyp¬ 
tians yielded their claims, and admitted the 
greater antiquity of the Phrygians. 

3. That these were the real facts I learnt at 
Memphis from the priests of Vulcan. The 
Greeks, among other foolish tales, relate that 
Psammetichus had the children brought up by 
women whose tongues he had previously cut 
out; but the priests said their bringing up was 
such as I have stated above. I got much other 
information also from conversation with these 
priests while I was at Memphis, and I even 
went to Heliopolis and to Thebes, expressly to 
try whether the priests of those places would 
agree in their accounts with the priests at 
Memphis. The Heliopolitans have the reputa¬ 
tion of being the best skilled in history of all 
the Egyptians. What they told me concerning 
their religion it is not my intention to repeat, 
except the names of their deities, which I be¬ 
lieve all men know equally. If I relate anything 
else concerning these matters, it will only be 
when compelled to do so by the course of my 
narrative. 

4. Now with regard to mere human matters, 
the accounts which they gave, and in which all 
agreed, were the following. The Egyptians, 
they said, were the first to discover the solar 
year, and to portion out its course into twelve 
parts.. They obtained this knowledge from the 
stars. (To my mind they contrive their year 
much more cleverly than the Greeks, for these 
last every other year intercalate a whole month, 
but the Egyptians, dividing the year into 
twelve months of thirty days each, add every 
year a space of five days besides, whereby the 


50 HERODOTUS [Book ii 


circuit of the seasons is made to return with 
uniformity.) The Egyptians, they went on to 
affirm, first brought into use the names of the 
twelve gods, which the Greeks adopted from 
them; and first erected altars, images, and tem¬ 
ples to the gods; and also first engraved upon 
stone the figures of animals. In most of these 
cases they proved to me that what they said 
was true. And they told me that the first man 
who ruled over Egypt was Men, and that in his 
time all Egypt, except the Thebaic canton, was 
a marsh, none of the land below Lake Moeris 
then showing itself above the surface of the 
water. This is a distance of seven days’ sail 
from the sea up the river. 

5. What they said of their country seemed 
to me very reasonable. For any one who sees 
Egypt, without having heard a word about it 
before, must perceive, if he has only common 
powers of observation, that the Egypt to which 
the Greeks go in their ships is an acquired 
country, the gift of the river. The same is true 
of the land above the lake, to the distance of 
three days’ voyage, concerning which the 
Egyptians say nothing, but which is exactly the 
same kind of country. 

The following is the general character of the 
region. In the first place, on approaching it 
by sea, when you are still a day’s sail from 
the land, if you let down a sounding-line you 
will bring up mud, and find yourself in eleven 
fathoms’ water, which shows that the soil 
washed down by the stream extends to that 
distance. 

6. The length of the country along shore, ac¬ 
cording to the bounds that we assign to Egypt, 
namely from the Plinthinetic gulf to Lake Ser- 
bonis, which extends along the base of Mount 
Casius, is sixty schoenes. The nations whose ter¬ 
ritories are scanty measure them by the fath¬ 
om; those whose bounds are less confined, by 
the furlong; those who have an ample territory, 
by the parasang; but if men have a country 
which is very vast, they measure it by the 
schoene. Now the length of the parasang is thir¬ 
ty furlongs, but the schoene, which is an Egyp¬ 
tian measure, is sixty furlongs. Thus the coast¬ 
line of Egypt would extend a length of three 
thousand six hundred furlongs. 

7. From the coast inland as far as Heliopolis 
the breadth of Egypt is considerable, the coun¬ 
try is flat, without springs, and full of swamps. 
The length of the route from the sea up to He¬ 
liopolis is almost exactly the same as that of the 
road which runs from the altar of the twelve 
gods at Athens to the temple of Olympian Jove 


at Pisa. If a person made a calculation he 
would find but a very little difference between 
the two routes, not more than about fifteen fur- ' 
longs; for the road from Athens to Pisa falls 
short of fifteen hundred furlongs by exactly 
fifteen, whereas the distance of Heliopolis from 
the sea is just the round number. 

8. As one proceeds beyond Heliopolis up the 
country, Egypt becomes narrow, the Arabian 
range of hills, which has a direction from north 
to south, shutting it in upon the one side, and I 
the Libyan range upon the other. The former ' 
ridge runs on without a break, and stretches 
away to the sea called the Erythraean; it con- 
tains the quarries whence the stone was cut for 
the pyramids of Memphis: and this is the point * 
where it ceases its first direction, and bends ' 
away in the manner above indicated. In its 
greatest length from east to west it is, as I have 1 
been informed, a distance of two months’ jour- 
ney; towards the extreme east its skirts produce I 
frankincense. Such are the chief features of 
this range. On the Libyan side, the other ridge | 
whereon the pyramids stand is rocky and cov- 
ered with sand; its direction is the same as that || 
of the Arabian ridge in the first part of its 1 
course. Above Heliopolis, then, there is no 1 
great breadth of territory for such a country as | 
Egypt, but during four days’ sail Egypt is nar- 1 
row; the valley between the two ranges is a lev- I 
el plain, and seemed to me to be, at the narrow- | 
est point, not more than two hundred furlongs I 
across from the Arabian to the Libyan hills. 
Above this point Egypt again widens. 

9. From Heliopolis to Thebes is nine days’ 
sail up the river; the distance is eighty-one 
schoenes, or 4860 furlongs. If we now put to- I 
gether the several measurements of the country 
we shall find that the distance along shore is, as ' 

I stated above, 3600 furlongs, and the distance 
from the sea inland to Thebes 6120 furlongs. 
Further, it is a distance of eighteen hundred 
furlongs from Thebes to the place called Ele¬ 
phantine. 

10. The greater portion of the country above 
described seemed to me to be, as the priests de¬ 
clared, a tract gained by the inhabitants. For 
the whole region above Memphis, lying be¬ 
tween the two ranges of hills that have been 
spoken of, appeared evidently to have formed 
at one time a gulf of the sea. It resembles (to 1 
compare small things with great) the parts 
about Ilium and Teuthrania, Ephesus, and the 
plain of the Macander. In all these regions the 
land has been formed by rivers, whereof the 
greatest is not to compare for size with any one 







5-15 the history 51 


of the five mouths of the Nile. I could mention 
other rivers also, far inferior to the Nile in 
magnitude, that have effected very great 
changes. Among these not the least is the Ache- 
loiis, which, after passing through Acarnania, 
empties itself into the sea opposite the islands 
called Echinades, and has already joined one- 
half of them to the continent. 

11. In Arabia, not far from Egypt, there is 
a long and narrow gulf running inland from 
the sea called the Erythraean, of which I will 
here set down the dimensions. Starting from 
its innermost recess, and using a row-boat, you 
take forty days to reach the open main, while 
you may cross the gulf at its widest part in the 
space of half a day. In this sea there is an ebb 
and flow of the tide every day. My opinion is 
that Egypt was formerly very much such a gulf 
as this—one gulf penetrated from the sea that 
washes Egypt on the north, and extended itself 
towards Ethiopia; another entered from the 
southern ocean, and stretched towards Syria; 
the two gulfs ran into the land so as almost to 
meet each other, and left between them only a 
very narrow tract of country. Now if the Nile 
should choose to divert his waters from their 
present bed into this Arabian gulf, what is 
there to hinder it from being filled up by the 
stream within, at the utmost, twenty thousand 
years.? For my part, I think it would be filled 
in half the time. How then should not a gulf, 
even of much greater size, have been filled up 
in the ages that passed before I was born, by a 
river that is at once so large and so given to 
working changes.? 

12. Thus I give credit to those from whom I 
received this account of Egypt, and am myself, 
moreover, strongly of the same opinion, since 
I remarked that the country projects into the 
sea further than the neighbouring shores, and 
I observed that there were shells upon the hills, 
and that salt exuded from the soil to such an 
extent as even to injure the pyramids; and I no¬ 
ticed also that there is but a single hill in all 
Egypt where sand is found, namely, the hill 
above Memphis; and further, I found the coun¬ 
try to bear no resemblance either to its border¬ 
land Arabia, or to Libya—nay, nor even to Syr¬ 
ia, which forms the seaboard of Arabia; but 
whereas the soil of Libya is, we know, sandy 
and of a reddish hue, and that of Arabia and 
Syria inclines to stone and clay, Egypt has a 
soil that is black and crumbly, as being alluvial 
and formed of the deposits brought down by 
the river from Ethiopia. 

13. One fact which I learnt of the priests is 


to me a strong evidence of the origin of the 
country. They said that when Mceris was king, 
the Nile overflowed all Egypt below Memphis, 
as soon as it rose so little as eight cubits. Now 
Mceris had not been dead 900 years at the time 
when I heard this of the priests; yet at the pres¬ 
ent day, unless the river rise sixteen, or, at the 
very least, fifteen cubits, it does not overflow 
the lands. It seems to me, therefore, that if the 
land goes on rising and growing at this rate, 
the Egyptians who dwell below Lake McEris, in 
the Delta (as it is called) and elsewhere, will 
one day, by the stoppage of the inundations, 
suffer permanently the fate which they told me 
they expected would some time or other befall 
the Greeks. On hearing that the whole land of 
Greece is watered by rain from heaven, and 
not, like their own, inundated by rivers, they 
observed—“Some day the Greeks will be disap¬ 
pointed of their grand hope, and then they will 
be wretchedly hungry”; which was as much as 
to say, “If God shall some day see fit not to 
grant the Greeks rain, but shall afflict them 
with a long drought, the Greeks will be swept 
away by a famine, since they have nothing to 
rely on but rain from Jove, and have no other 
resource for water.” 

14. And certes, in thus speaking of the 
Greeks the Egyptians say nothing but what is 
true. But now let me tell the Egyptians how 
the case stands with themselves. If, as I said be¬ 
fore, the country below Memphis, which is the 
land that is always rising, continues to increase 
in height at the rate at which it has risen in 
times gone by, how will it be possible for the 
inhabitants of that region to avoid hunger, 
when they will certainly have no rain, and the 
river will not be able to overflow their corn- 
lands.? At present, it must be confessed, they 
obtain the fruits of the field with less trouble 
than any other people in the world, the rest of 
the Egyptians included, since they have no 
need to break up the ground with the plough, 
nor to use the hoe, nor to do any of the work 
which the rest of mankind find necessary if 
they are to get a crop; but the husbandman 
waits till the river has of its own accord spread 
itself over the fields and withdrawn again to 
its bed, and then sows his plot of ground, and 
after sowing turns his swine into it—the swine 
tread in the corn—after which he has only to 
await the harvest. The swine serve him also 
to thrash the grain, which is then carried to 
the garner. 

15. If then we choose to adopt the views of 
the lonians concerning Egypt, we must come 


52 HERODOTUS [Book ii 


to the conclusion that the Egyptians had form¬ 
erly no country at all. For the lonians say that 
nothing is really Egypt but the Delta, which 
extends along shore from the Watch-tower of 
Perseus, as it is called, to the Pelusiac Salt-Pans, 
a distance of forty schoenes, and stretches in¬ 
land as far as the city of Cercasorus, where the 
Nile divides into the two streams which reach 
the sea at Pelusium and Canobus respectively. 
The rest of what is accounted Egypt belongs, 
they say, either to Arabia or Libya. But the 
Delta, as the Egyptians affirm, and as I myself 
am persuaded, is formed of the deposits of the 
river, and has only recently, if I may use the 
expression, come to light. If, then, they had 
formerly no territory at all, how came they to 
be so extravagant as to fancy themselves the 
most ancient race in the world? Surely there 
was no need of their making the experiment 
with the children to see what language they 
would first speak. But in truth I do not believe 
that the Egyptians came into being at the same 
time with the Delta, as the lonians call it; I 
think they have always existed ever since the 
human race began; as the land went on in¬ 
creasing, part of the population came down 
into the new country, part remained in their 
old settlements. In ancient times the Thebai's 
bore the name of Egypt, a district of which the 
entire circumference is but 6120 furlongs. 

16. If, then, my judgment on these matters 
be right, the lonians are mistaken in what they 
say of Egypt. If, on the contrary, it is they who 
are right, then I undertake to show that neither 
the lonians nor any of the other Greeks know 
how to count. For they all say that the earth is 
divided into three parts, Europe, Asia, and 
Libya, whereas they ought to add a fourth part, 
the Delta of Egypt, since they do not include it 
either in Asia or Libya. For is it not their 
theory that the Nile separates Asia from Lib¬ 
ya? As the Nile, therefore, splits in two at the 
apex of the Delta, the Delta itself must be a 
separate country, not contained in either Asia 
or Libya. 

17. Here I take my leave of the opinions of 
the lonians, and proceed to deliver my own 
sentiments on these subjects. I consider Egypt 
to be the whole country inhabited by the Egyp¬ 
tians, just as Cilicia is the tract occupied by the 
Cilicians, and Assyria that possessed by the As¬ 
syrians. And I regard the only proper boun¬ 
dary-line between Libya and Asia to be that 
which is marked out by the Egyptian frontier. 
For if we take the boundary-line commonly re¬ 
ceived by the Greeks, we must regard Egypt 


as divided, along its whole length from Ele¬ 
phantine and the Cataracts to Cercasorus, into 
two parts, each belonging to a different por¬ 
tion of the world, one to Asia, the other to Lib¬ 
ya; since the Nile divides Egypt in two from 
the Cataracts to the sea, running as far as the 
city of Cercasorus in a single stream, but at that 
point separating into three branches, whereof 
the one which bends eastward is called the Pel¬ 
usiac mouth, and that which slants to the west, 
the Canobic. Meanwhile the straight course of 
the stream, which comes down from the upper 
country and meets the apex of the Delta, con¬ 
tinues on, dividing the Delta down the middle, 
and empties itself into the sea by a mouth, 
which is as celebrated, and carries as large a 
body of water, as most of the others, the mouth 
called the Sebennytic. Besides these there are 
two other mouths which run out of the Seben¬ 
nytic called respectively the Saitic and the Men- 
desian. The Bolbitine mouth, and the Bucolic, 
are not natural branches, but channels made by 
excavation. 

18. My judgment as to the extent of Egypt 
is confirmed by an oracle delivered at the 
shrine of Ammon, of which I had no knowl¬ 
edge at all until after I had formed my opin¬ 
ion. It happened that the people of the cities 
Marea and Apis, who live in the part of Egypt 
that borders on Libya, took a dislike to the re¬ 
ligious usages of the country concerning sac¬ 
rificial animals, and wished no longer to be re¬ 
stricted from eating the flesh of cows. So, as 
they believed themselves to be Libyans and not 
Egyptians, they sent to the shrine to say that, 
having nothing in common with the Egyp¬ 
tians, neither inhabiting the Delta nor using 
the Egyptian tongue, they claimed to be al¬ 
lowed to eat whatever they pleased. Their re¬ 
quest, however, was refused by the god, who 
declared in reply that Egypt was the entire 
tract of country which the Nile overspreads 
and irrigates, and the Egyptians were the peo¬ 
ple who lived below Elephantine, and drank 
the waters of that river. 

19. So said the oracle. Now the Nile, when 
it overflows, floods not only the Delta, but also 
the tracts of country on both sides the stream 
which are thought to belong to Libya and Ara¬ 
bia, in some places reaching to the extent of 
two days’ journey from its banks, in some even 
exceeding that distance, but in others falling 
short of it. 

Concerning the nature of the river, I was not 
able to gain any information either from the 
priests or from others. I was particularly anx- 







16-25J THE HISTORY 53 


ious to learn from them why the Nile, at the 
commencement of the summer solstice, begins 
to rise, and continues to increase for a hundred 
days—and why, as soon as that number is past, 
it forthwith retires and contracts its stream, 
continuing low during the whole of the winter 
until the summer solstice comes round again. 
On none of these points could I obtain any ex¬ 
planation from the inhabitants, though I made 
every inquiry, wishing to know what was com¬ 
monly reported—they could neither tell me 
what special virtue the Nile has which makes 
it so opposite in its nature to all other streams, 
nor why, unlike every other river, it gives forth 
no breezes from its surface. 

20. Some of the Greeks, however, wishing 
to get a reputation for cleverness, have offered 
explanations of the phenomena of the river, 
for which they have accounted in three differ¬ 
ent ways. Two of these I do not think it worth 
while to speak of, further than simply to men¬ 
tion what they are. One pretends that the Ete¬ 
sian winds cause the rise of the river by pre¬ 
venting the Nile-water from running off into 
the sea. But in the first place it has often hap¬ 
pened, when the Etesian winds did not blow, 
that the Nile has risen according to its usual 
wont; and further, if the Etesian winds pro¬ 
duced the effect, the other rivers which flow in 
a direction opposite to those winds ought to 
present the same phenomena as the Nile, and 
the more so as they are all smaller streams, and 
have a weaker current. But these rivers, of 
which there are many both in Syria and Libya, 
are entirely unlike the Nile in this respect. 

21. The second opinion is even more unsci¬ 
entific than the one just mentioned, and also, 
if I may so say, more marvellous. It is that the 
Nile acts so strangely, because it flows from the 
ocean, and that the ocean flows all round the 
earth. 

22. The third explanation, which is very 
much more plausible than either of the others, 
is positively the furthest from the truth; for 
there is really nothing in what it says, any more 
than in the other theories. It is, that the inun¬ 
dation of the Nile is caused by the melting of 
snows.^ Now, as the Nile flows out of Libya, 
through Ethiopia, into Egypt, how is it possible 
that it can be formed of melted snow, running, 

^ Herodotus is wrong in supposing snow could 
not be found on mountains in the hot climate of 
Africa; perpetual snow is not confined to certain 
latitudes; and ancient and modern discoveries 
prove that it is found in the ranges S. of Abys¬ 
sinia. 


as it does, from the hottest regions of the world 
into cooler countries.?^ Many are the proofs 
whereby any one capable of reasoning on the 
subject may be convinced that it is most un¬ 
likely this should be the case. The first and 
strongest argument is furnished by the winds, 
which always blow hot from these regions. The 
second is that rain and frost are unknown 
there.^ Now whenever snow falls, it must of 
necessity rain within five days; so that, if there 
were snow, there must be rain also in those 
parts. Thirdly, it is certain that the natives of 
the country are black with the heat, that the 
kites and the swallows remain there the whole 
year, and that the cranes, when they fly from 
the rigours of a Scythian winter, flock thither 
to pass the cold season. If then, in the country 
whence the Nile has its source, or in that 
through which it flows, there fell ever so little 
snow, it is absolutely impossible that any of 
these circumstances could take place. 

23. As for the writer^ who attributes the 
phenomenon to the ocean, his account is in¬ 
volved in such obscurity that it is impossible 
to disprove it by argument. For my part I 
know of no river called Ocean, and I think that 
Homer, or one of the earlier poets, invented the 
name, and introduced it into his poetry. 

24. Perhaps, after censuring all the opinions 
that have been put forward on this obscure sub¬ 
ject, one ought to propose some theory of one’s 
own. I will therefore proceed to explain what 
I think to be the reason of the Nile’s swelling 
in the summer time. During the winter, the 
sun is driven out of his usual course by the 
storms, and removes to the upper parts of Lib¬ 
ya. This is the whole secret in the fewest possi¬ 
ble words; for it stands to reason that the coun¬ 
try to which the Sun-god approaches the near¬ 
est, and which he passes most directly over, 
will be scantest of water, and that there the 
streams which feed the rivers will shrink the 
most. 

25. To explain, however, more at length, the 
case is this. The sun, in his passage across the 
upper parts of Libya, affects them in the fol¬ 
lowing way. As the air in those regions is con¬ 
stantly clear, and the country warm through 
the absence of cold winds, the sun in his 
passage across them acts upon them exact¬ 
ly as he is wont to act elsewhere in summer, 
when his path is in the middle of heaven—that 

^ Herodotus was not aware of tlie rainy season 
in Sennar and the S.S.W. of Abyssinia, nor did he 
know of the Abyssinian snow. 

^Hecattcus. 



54 HERODOTUS [Bookii 


is, he attracts the water. After attracting it, he 
again repels it into the upper regions, where 
the winds lay hold of it, scatter it, and reduce 
it to a vapour, whence it naturally enough 
comes to pass that the winds which blow from 
this quarter—the south and south-west—are of 
all winds the most rainy. And my own opinion 
is that the sun does not get rid of all the water 
which he draws year by year from the Nile, 
hut retains some about him. When the winter 
begins to soften, the sun goes back again to his 
old place in the middle of the heaven, and pro¬ 
ceeds to attract water equally from all coun¬ 
tries. Till then the other rivers run big, from 
the quantity of rain-water which they bring 
down from countries where so much moisture 
falls that all the land is cut into gullies; but in 
summer, when the showers fail, and the sun at¬ 
tracts their water, they become low. The Nile, 
on the contrary, not deriving any of its bulk 
from rains, and being in winter subject to the 
attraction of the sun, naturally runs at that sea¬ 
son, unlike all other streams, with a less bur¬ 
then of water than in the summer time. For in 
summer it is exposed to attraction equally with 
all other rivers, but in winter it suffers alone. 
The sun, therefore, I regard as the sole cause 
of the phenomenon. 

26. It is the sun also, in my opinion, which, 
by heating the space through which it passes, 
makes the air in Egypt so dry. There is thus 
perpetual summer in the upper parts of Libya. 
Were the position of the heavenly regions re¬ 
versed, so that the place where now the north 
wind and the winter have their dwelling be¬ 
came the station of the south wind and of the 
noon-day, while, on the other hand, the sta¬ 
tion of the south wind became that of the 
north, the consequence would be that the sun, 
driven from the mid-heaven by the winter and 
the northern gales, would betake himself to 
the upper parts of Europe, as he now does to 
those of Libya, and then I believe his passage 
across Europe would affect the Ister exactly as 
the Nile is affected at the present day. 

27. And with respect to the fact that no 
breeze blows from the Nile, I am of opinion 
that no wind is likely to arise in very hot coun¬ 
tries, for breezes love to blow from some cold 
quarter. 

28. Let us leave these things, however, to 
their natural course, to continue as they are and 
have been from the beginning. With regard to 
the sources of the Nile, I have found no one 
among all those with whom I have conversed, 
whether Egyptians, Libyans, or Greeks, who 


professed to have any knowledge, except a sin¬ 
gle person. He was the scribe who kept the reg¬ 
ister of the sacred treasures of Minerva in the 
city of Sais, and he did not seem to me to be in 
earnest when he said that he knew them per¬ 
fectly well. His story was as follows:—“Be¬ 
tween Sycne, a city of the Thebais, and Ele¬ 
phantine, there are” (he said) “two hills with 
sharp conical tops; the name of the one is Cro- 
phi, of the other, Mophi. Midway between 
them are the fountains of the Nile, fountains 
which it is impossible to fathom. Half the 
water runs northward into Egypt, half to the 
south towards Ethiopia.” The fountains were 
known to be unfathomable, he declared, be¬ 
cause Psammetichus, an Egyptian king, had 
made trial of them. He had caused a rope to be 
made, many thousand fathoms in length, and 
had sounded the fountain with it, but could 
find no bottom. By this the scribe gave me to 
understand, if there was any truth at all in 
what he said, that in this fountain there are 
certain strong eddies, and a regurgitation, ow¬ 
ing to the force wherewith the water dashes 
against the mountains, and hence a sounding¬ 
line cannot be got to reach the bottom of the 
spring. 

29. No other information on this head could 
I obtain from any quarter. All that I succeeded 
in learning further of the more distant por¬ 
tions of the Nile, by ascending myself as high 
as Elephantine, and making inquiries concern¬ 
ing the parts beyond, was the following:—As 
one advances beyond Elephantine, the land 
rises. Hence it is necessary in this part of the 
river to attach a rope to the boat on each side, 
as men harness an ox, and so proceed on the 
journey. If the rope snaps, the vessel is borne 
away down stream by the force of the current. 
The navigation continues the same for four 
days, the river winding greatly, like the Ma?an- 
der, and the distance traversed amounting to 
twelve schemes. Here you come upon a smooth 
and level plain, where the Nile flows in two 
branches, round an island called Tachompso. 
The country above Elephantine is inhabited by 
the Ethiopians, who possess one-half of this 
island, the Egyptians occupying the other. 
Above the island there is a great lake, the 
shores of which are inhabited by Ethiopian no¬ 
mads; after passing it, you come again to the 
stream of the Nile, which runs into the lake. 
Here you land, and travel for forty days along 
the banks of the river, since it is impossible to 
proceed further in a boat on account of the 
sharp peaks which jut out from the water, and 




I 

I 

I« 

I 

I 







26-32] THE HISTORY 55 


the sunken rocks which abound in that part of 
the stream. When you have passed this portion 
of the river in the space of forty days, you go 
on board another boat and proceed by water 
for twelve days more, at the end of which time 
you reach a great city called Meroe, which is 
said to be the capital of the other Ethiopians. 
The only gods worshipped by the inhabitants 
are Jupiter and Bacchus, to whom great hon¬ 
ours are paid. There is an oracle of Jupiter in 
the city, which directs the warlike expeditions 
of the Ethiopians; when it commands they go 
to war, and in whatever direction it bids them 
march, thither straightway they carry their 
arms. 

30. On leaving this city, and again mount¬ 
ing the stream, in the same space of time which 
it took you to reach the capital from Elephan¬ 
tine, you come to the Deserters, who bear the 
name of Asmach. This word, translated into 
our language, means “the men who stand on 
the left hand of the king.” These Deserters are 
Egyptians of the warrior caste, who, to the 
number of two hundred and forty thousand, 
went over to the Ethiopians in the reign of 
king Psammetichus. The cause of their deser¬ 
tion was the following:—Three garrisons were 
maintained in Egypt at that time, one in the 
city of Elephantine against the Ethiopians, an¬ 
other in the Pelusiac Daphnae, against the Syri¬ 
ans and Arabians, and a third, against the Lib¬ 
yans, in Marea. (The very same posts are to this 
day occupied by the Persians, whose forces are 
in garrison both in Daphnae and in Elephan¬ 
tine.) Now it happened, that on one occasion 
the garrisons were not relieved during the 
space of three years; the soldiers, therefore, at 
the end of that time, consulted together, and 
having determined by common consent to re¬ 
volt, marched away towards Ethiopia. Psam¬ 
metichus, informed of the movement, set out 
in pursuit, and coming up with them, besought 
them with many words not to desert the gods 
of their country, nor abandon their wives and 
children. “Nay, but,” said one of the deserters 
with an unseemly gesture, “wherever we go, 
we are sure enough of finding wives and chil¬ 
dren.” Arrived in Ethiopia, they placed them¬ 
selves at the disposal of the king. In return, he 
made them a present of a tract of land which 
belonged to certain Ethiopians with whom he 
was at feud, bidding them expel the inhabitants 
and take possession of their territory. From 
the time that this settlement was formed, their 
acquaintance with Egyptian manners has tend¬ 
ed to civilise the Ethiopians. 


31. Thus the course of the Nile is known, 
not only throughout Egypt, but to the extent 
of four months’ journey either by land or water 
above the Egyptian boundary; for on calcula¬ 
tion it will be found that it takes that length of 
time to travel from Elephantine to the country 
of the Deserters. There the direction of the riv¬ 
er is from west to east. Beyond, no one has any 
certain knowledge of its course, since the coun¬ 
try is uninhabited by reason of the excessive heat. 

32. I did hear, indeed, what I will now re¬ 
late, from certain natives of Gyrene. Once upon 
a time, they said, they were on a visit to the 
oracular shrine of Ammon, when it chanced 
that in the course of conversation with Etear- 
chus, the Ammonian king, the talk fell upon 
the Nile, how that its sources were unknown to 
all men. Etearchus upon this mentioned that 
some Nasamonians had once come to his court, 
and when asked if they could give any infor¬ 
mation concerning the uninhabited parts of 
Libya, had told the following tale. (The Nasa¬ 
monians are a Libyan race who occupy the Syr- 
tis, and a tract of no great size towards the 
east.) They said there had grown up among 
them some wild young men, the sons of cer¬ 
tain chiefs, who, when they came to man’s es¬ 
tate, indulged in all manner of extravagancies, 
and among other things drew lots for five of 
their number to go and explore the desert parts 
of Libya, and try if they could not penetrate 
further than any had done previously. The 
coast of Libya along the sea which washes it to 
the north, throughout its entire length from 
Egypt to Cape Soloeis,^ which is its furthest 
point, is inhabited by Libyans of many distinct 
tribes who possess the whole tract except cer¬ 
tain portions which belong to the Phoenicians 
and the Greeks. Above the coast-line and the 
country inhabited by the maritime tribes, Libya 
is full of wild beasts; while beyond the wild 
beast region there is a tract which is wholly 
sand, very scant of water, and utterly and en¬ 
tirely a desert. The young men therefore, des¬ 
patched on this errand by their comrades with 
a plentiful supply of water and provisions, 
travelled at first through the inhabited region, 
passing which they came to the wild beast tract, 
whence they finally entered upon the desert, 
which they proceeded to cross in a direction 
from east to west. After journeying for many 
days over a wide extent of sand, they came at 
last to a plain where they observed trees grow¬ 
ing; approaching them, and seeing fruit on 

^ Cape Spartcl, near Tangier. 



56 HERODOTUS [Book ii 


them, they proceeded to gather it. While they 
were thus engaged, there came upon them 
some dwarfish men, under the middle height, 
who seized them and carried them ofif. The 
Nasamonians could not understand a word of 
their language, nor had they any acquaintance 
with the language of the Nasamonians. They 
were led across extensive marshes, and finally 
came to a town, where all the men were of the 
height of their conductors, and black-complex- 
ioned. A great river flowed by the town, running 
from west to east, and containing crocodiles. 

33. Here let me dismiss Etearchus the Am- 
monian, and his story, only adding that (ac¬ 
cording to the Cyrenaeans) he declared that the 
Nasamonians got safe back to their country, 
and that the men whose city they had reached 
were a nation of sorcerers. With respect to the 
river which ran by their town, Etearchus con¬ 
jectured it to be the Nile; and reason favours 
that view. For the Nile certainly flows out of 
Libya, dividing it down the middle, and as I 
conceive, judging the unknown from the 
known, rises at the same distance from its 
mouth as the Ister. This latter river has its 
source in the country of the Celts near the city 
Pyrene, and runs through the middle of Eu¬ 
rope, dividing it into two portions. The Celts 
live beyond the pillars of Hercules, and border 
on the Cynesians, who dwell at the extreme 
west of Europe. Thus the Ister flows through 
the whole of Europe before it finally empties 
itself into the Euxine at Istria, one of the col¬ 
onies of the Milesians. 

34. Now as this river flows through regions 
that are inhabited, its course is perfectly well 
known; but of the sources of the Nile no one 
can give any account, since Libya, the country 
through which it passes, is desert and without 
inhabitants. As far as it was possible to get in¬ 
formation by inquiry, I have given a descrip¬ 
tion of the stream. It enters Egypt from the 
parts beyond. Egypt lies almost exactly oppo¬ 
site the mountainous portion of Cilicia, whence 
a lightly-equipped traveller may reach Sinope 
on the Euxine in five days by the direct route. 
Sinope lies opposite the place where the Ister 
falls into the sea.^ My opinion therefore is that 
the Nile, as it traverses the whole of Libya, is 
of equal length with the Ister. And here I take 
my leave of this subject. 

^ This of course is neither true, nor near the 
truth; and it is difficult to make out in what sense 
Herodotus meant to assert it. Perhaps he attached 
no very distinct geographical meaning to the word 
“opposite.’’ 


35. Concerning Egypt itself I shall extend 
my remarks to a great length, because there is 
no country that possesses so many wonders, nor 
any that has such a number of works which 
defy description. Not only is the climate differ¬ 
ent from that of the rest of the world, and the 
rivers unlike any other rivers, but the people 
also, in most of their manners and customs, 
exactly reverse the common practice of man¬ 
kind. The women attend the markets and 
trade, while the men sit at home at the loom; 
and here, while the rest of the world works the 
woof up the warp, the Egyptians work it 
down; the women likewise carry burthens 
upon their shoulders, while the men carry them 
upon their heads. They eat their food out of 
doors in the streets, but retire for private pur¬ 
poses to their houses, giving as a reason that 
what is unseemly, but necessary, ought to be 
done in secret, but what has nothing unseemly 
about it, should be done openly. A woman 
cannot serve the priestly office, either for god or 
goddess, but men are priests to both; sons need 
not support their parents unless they choose, 
but daughters must, whether they choose or no. 

36. In other countries the priests have long 
hair, in Egypt their heads are shaven; else¬ 
where it is customary, in mourning, for near 
relations to cut their hair close: the Egyptians, 
who wear no hair at any other time, when they 
lose a relative, let their beards and the hair of 
their heads grow long. All other men pass their 
lives separate from animals, the Egyptians have 
animals always living with them; others make 
barley and wheat their food; it is a disgrace to 
do so in Egypt,^ where the grain they live on is 
spelt, which some call zea. Dough they knead 
with their feet; but they mix mud, and even 
take up dirt, with their hands. They are the 
only people in the world—they at least, and 
such as have learnt the practice from them— 
who use circumcision. Their men wear two 
garments apiece, their women but one. They 
put on the rings and fasten the ropes to sails 
inside; others put them outside. When they 
write or calculate, instead of going, like the 
Greeks, from left to right, they move their 
hand from right to left; and they insist, not¬ 
withstanding, that it is they who go to the 
right, and the Greeks who go to the left. They 
have two quite different kinds of writing, one 
of which is called sacred, the other common. 

37. They are religious to excess, far beyond 
any other race of men, and use the following 
ceremonies:—They drink out of brazen cups, 

^ This statement is contrary to fact. 





33-41 ] THE HISTORY 57 


which they scour every day: there is no excep¬ 
tion to this practice. They wear linen garments, 
which they are specially careful to have always 
fresh washed. They practise circumcision for 
the sake of cleanliness, considering it better to 
be cleanly than comely. The priests shave their 
whole body every other day, that no lice or 
other impure thing may adhere to them when 
they are engaged in the service of the gods. 
Their dress is entirely of linen, and their shoes 
of the papyrus plant: it is not lawful for them 
to wear either dress or shoes of any other ma¬ 
terial. They bathe twice every day in cold wa¬ 
ter, and twice each night; besides which they 
observe, so to speak, thousands of ceremonies. 
They enjoy, however, not a few advantages. 
They consume none of their own property, and 
are at no expense for anything; but every day 
bread is baked for them of the sacred corn, and 
a plentiful supply of beef and of goose’s flesh 
is assigned to each, and also a portion of wine 
made from the grape. Fish they are not allowed 
to eat; and beans—which none of the Egyp¬ 
tians ever sow, or eat, if they come up of their 
own accord, either raw or boiled—the priests 
will not even endure to look on, since they con¬ 
sider it an unclean kind of pulse. Instead of a 
single priest, each god has the attendance of a 
college, at the head of which is a chief priest; 
when one of these dies, his son is appointed in 
his room. 

38. Male kine are reckoned to belong to Ep- 
aphus, and are therefore tested in the following 
manner:—One of the priests appointed for the 
purpose searches to see if there is a single black 
hair on the whole body, since in that case the 
beast is unclean. He examines him all over, 
standing on his legs, and again laid upon his 
back; after which he takes the tongue out of 
his mouth, to see if it be clean in respect of the 
prescribed marks (what they are I will men¬ 
tion elsewhere); he also inspects the hairs of 
the tail, to observe if they grow naturally. If 
the animal is pronounced clean in all these var¬ 
ious points, the priest marks him by twisting a 
piece of papyrus round his horns, and attach¬ 
ing thereto some sealing-clay, which he then 
stamps with his own signet-ring. After this the 
beast is led away; and it is forbidden, under the 
penalty of death, to sacrifice an animal which 
has not been marked in this way. 

39. The following is their manner of sacri¬ 
fice:—They lead the victim, marked with their 
signet, to the altar where they are about to 
offer it, and setting the wood alight, pour a 
libation of wine upon the altar in front of the 


victim, and at the same time invoke the god. 
Then they slay the animal, and cutting off his 
head, proceed to flay the body. Next they take 
the head, and heaping imprecations on it, if 
there is a market-place and a body of Greek 
traders in the city, they carry it there and sell it 
instantly; if, however, there are no Greeks 
among them, they throw the head into the riv¬ 
er. The imprecation is to this effect:—They 
pray that if any evil is impending either over 
those who sacrifice, or over universal Egypt, it 
may be made to fall upon that head. These 
practices, the imprecations upon the heads, and 
the libations of wine, prevail all over Egypt, 
and extend to victims of all sorts; and hence 
the Egyptians will never eat the head of any an¬ 
imal. 

40. The disembowelling and burning are, 
however, different in different sacrifices. I will 
mention the mode in use with respect to the 
goddess whom they regard as the greatest, and 
honour with the chiefest festival. When they 
have flayed their steer they pray, and when 
their prayer is ended they take the paunch of 
the animal out entire, leaving the intestines 
and the fat inside the body; they then cut off 
the legs, the ends of the loins, the shoulders, 
and the neck; and having so done, they fill the 
body of the steer with clean bread, honey, rai¬ 
sins, figs, frankincense, myrrh, and other aro¬ 
matics. Thus filled, they burn the body, pour¬ 
ing over it great quantities of oil. Before offer¬ 
ing the sacrifice they fast, and while the bodies 
of the victims are being consumed they beat 
themselves. Afterwards, when they have con¬ 
cluded this part of the ceremony, they have the 
other parts of the victim served up to them for 
a repast. 

41. The male kine, therefore, if clean, and 
the male calves, are used for sacrifice by the 
Egyptians universally; but the females they are 
not allowed to sacrifice, since they are sacred to 
Isis. The statue of this goddess has the form of 
a woman but with horns like a cow, resembling 
thus the Greek representations of lo; and the 
Egyptians, one and all, venerate cows much 
more highly than any other animal. This is the 
reason why no native of Egypt, whether man 
or woman, will give a Greek a kiss, or use the 
knife of a Greek, or his spit, or his cauldron, or 
taste the flesh of an ox, known to be pure, if it 
has been cut with a Greek knife. When kine 
die, the following is the manner of their sepul¬ 
ture:—The females are thrown into the river; 
the males are buried in the suburbs of the 
towns, with one or both of their horns appear- 


58 HERODOTUS [ Book ii 


ing above the surface of the ground to mark the 
place. When the bodies are decayed, a boat 
comes, at an appointed time, from the island 
called Prosbpitis,—which is a portion of the 
Delta, nine schemes in circumference,—and 
calls at the several cities in turn to collect the 
bones of the oxen. Prosdpitis is a district con¬ 
taining several cities; the name of that from 
which the boats come is Atarbechis. Venus has 
a temple there of much sanctity. Great num¬ 
bers of men go forth from this city and proceed 
to the other towns, where they dig up the 
bones, which they take away with them and 
bury together in one place. The same practice 
prevails with respect to the interment of all 
other cattle—the law so determining; they do 
not slaughter any of them. 

42. Such Egyptians as possess a temple of 
the Theban Jove, or live in the Thebaic canton, 
ofiFer no sheep in sacrifice, but only goats; for 
the Egyptians do not all worship the same 
gods, excepting Isis and Osiris, the latter of 
whom they say is the Grecian Bacchus. Those, 
on the contrary, who possess a temple dedicat¬ 
ed to Mendes, or belong to the Mendesian can¬ 
ton, abstain from offering goats, and sacrifice 
sheep instead. The Thebans, and such as imi¬ 
tate them in their practice, give the following 
account of the origin of the custom:—“Her¬ 
cules,” they say, “wished of all things to see 
Jove, but Jove did not choose to be seen of him. 
At length, when Hercules persisted, Jove hit on 
a device—to flay a ram, and, cutting off his 
head, hold the head before him, and cover him¬ 
self with the fleece. In this guise he showed 
himself to Hercules.” Therefore the Egyptians 
give their statues of Jupiter the face of a ram: 
and from them the practice has passed to the 
Ammonians, who are a joint colony of Egyp¬ 
tians and Ethiopians, speaking a language be¬ 
tween the two; hence also, in my opinion, the 
latter people took their name of Ammonians, 
since the Egyptian name for Jupiter is Amun. 
Such, then, is the reason why the Thebans do 
not sacrifice rams, but consider them sacred an¬ 
imals. Upon one day in the year, however, at 
the festival of Jupiter, they slay a single ram, 
and stripping off the fleece, cover with it the 
statue of that god, as he once covered himself, 
and then bring up to the statue of Jove an im¬ 
age of Hercules, When this has been done, the 
whole assembly beat their breasts in mourning 
for the ram, and afterwards bury him in a holy 
sepulchre. 

43. The account which I received of this 
Hercules makes him one of the twelve gods. Of 


the other Hercules, with whom the Greeks are 
familiar, I could hear nothing in any part of 
Egypt. That the Greeks, however (those I 
mean who gave the son of Amphitryon that 
name), took the name^ from the Egyptians, 
and not the Egyptians from the Greeks, is I 
think clearly proved, among other arguments, 
by the fact that both the parents of Hercules, 
Amphitryon as well as Alcmena, were of Egyp¬ 
tian origin. Again, the Egyptians disclaim all 1 
knowledge of the names of Neptune and the 
Dioscuri, and do not include them in the num- I 
ber of their gods; but had they adopted the ^ 
name of any god from the Greeks, these would 1 
have been the likeliest to obtain notice, since | 
the Egyptians, as I am well convinced, prac¬ 
tised navigation at that time, and the Greeks 
also were some of them mariners, so that they 
would have been more likely to know the 
names of these gods than that of Hercules. But 
the Egyptian Hercules is one of their ancient 
gods. Seventeen thousand years before the 
reign of Amasis, the twelve gods were, they 
affirm, produced from the eight: and of these 
twelve, Hercules is one. 

44. In the wish to get the best information 11 
that I could on these matters, I made a voyage i 
to Tyre in Phoenicia, hearing there was a tem¬ 
ple of Hercules at that place, very highly ven- | 
erated. I visited the temple, and found it richly p 
adorned with a number of oflferings, among | 
which were two pillars, one of pure gold, the 
other of emerald, shining with great brilliancy 
at night. In a conversation which I held with ! 
the priests, I inquired how long their temple 
had been built, and found by their answer that i 
they, too, differed from the Greeks. They said 1 
that the temple was built at the same time that 
the city was founded, and that the foundation 
of the city took place two thousand three hun¬ 
dred years ago. In Tyre I remarked another 
temple where the same god was worshipped as 
the Thasian Hercules. So I went on to Thasos, ‘ 
where 1 found a temple of Hercules which had 
been built by the Phoenicians who colonised 
that island when they sailed in search of Eu- 
ropa. Even this was five generations earlier 
than the time when Hercules, son of Amphi¬ 
tryon, was born in Greece. These researches 
show plainly that there is an ancient god Her¬ 
cules; and my own opinion is that those f 
Greeks act most wisely who build and main¬ 
tain two temples of Hercules, in the one of 

’ It is scarcely necessary to say that no Egyptian 
god has a name from which that of Hercules can 
by any possibility have been formed. 


I 







42 - 49 ] 

which the Hercules worshipped is known by 
the name of Olympian, and has sacrifice of¬ 
fered to him as an immortal, while in the other 
the honours paid are such as are due to a hero. 

45. The Greeks tell many tales without due 
investigation, and among them the following 
silly fable respecting Hercules;—“Hercules,” 
they say, “went once to Egypt, and there the 
inhabitants took him, and putting a chaplet on 
his head, led him out in solemn procession, in¬ 
tending to ofTer him a sacrifice to Jupiter. For 
a while he submitted quietly; but when they 
led him up to the altar and began the ceremon¬ 
ies, he put forth his strength and slew them 
all.” Now to me it seems that such a story 
proves the Greeks to be utterly ignorant of the 
character and customs of the people. The 
Egyptians do not think it allowable even to sac¬ 
rifice cattle, excepting sheep, and the male kine 
and calves, provided they be pure, and also 
geese. How, then, can it be believed that they 
would sacrifice men.^ And again, how would 
it have been possible for Hercules alone, and, 
as they confess, a mere mortal, to destroy so 
many thousands.^ In saying thus much con¬ 
cerning these matters, may I incur no displeas¬ 
ure either of god or hero! 

46. I mentioned above that some of the 
Egyptians abstain from sacrificing goats, either 
male or female. The reason is the following:— 
These Egyptians, who are the Mendesians, con¬ 
sider Pan to be one of the eight gods who ex¬ 
isted before the twelve, and Pan is represented 
in Egypt by the painters and the sculptors, just 
as he is in Greece, with the face and legs of a 
goat. They do not, however, believe this to be 
his shape, or consider him in any respect unlike 
the other gods; but they represent him thus for 
a reason which I prefer not to relate. The Men¬ 
desians hold all goats in veneration, but the 
male more than the female, giving the goat¬ 
herds of the males especial honour. One is ven¬ 
erated more highly than all the rest, and when 
he dies there is a great mourning throughout 
all the Mendesian cantor. In Egyptian, the goat 
and Pan are both called Mendes. 

47. The pig is regarded among them as an un¬ 
clean animal, so much so that if a man in passing 
accidentally touch a pig, he instantly hurries to 
the river, and plunges in with all his clothes on. 
Hence, too, the swineherds, notwithstanding 
that they are of pure Egyptian blood, are for¬ 
bidden to enter into any of the temples, which 
are open to all other Egyptians; and further, no 
one will give his daughter in marriage to a 
swineherd, or take a wife from among them. 


59 

so that the swineherds are forced to intermarry 
among themselves. They do not offer swine in 
sacrifice to any of their gods, excepting Bacchus 
and the Moon, whom they honour in this way 
at the same time, sacrificing pigs to both of 
them at the same full moon, and afterwards 
eating of the flesh. There is a reason alleged by 
them lor their detestation of swine at all other 
seasons, and their use of them at this festival, 
with which I am well acquainted, but which I 
do not think it proper to mention. The follow¬ 
ing is the mode in which they sacrifice the 
swine to the Moon:—As soon as the victim is 
slain, the tip of the tail, the spleen, and the caul 
are put together, and having been covered with 
all the fat that has been found in the animal’s 
belly, are straightway burnt. The remainder of 
the flesh is eaten on the same day that the sacri¬ 
fice is offered, which is the day of the full 
moon: at any other time they would not so 
much as taste it. The poorer sort, who cannot 
afford live pigs, form pigs of dough, which 
they bake and offer in sacrifice. 

48. To Bacchus, on the eve of his feast, every 
Egyptian sacrifices a hog before the door of his 
house, which is then given back to the swine¬ 
herd by whom it was furnished, and by him 
carried away. In other respects the festival is 
celebrated almost exactly as Bacchic festivals 
are in Greece, excepting that the Egyptians 
have no choral dances. They also use instead of 
phalli another invention, consisting of images 
a cubit high, pulled by strings, which the wo¬ 
men carry round to the villages. A piper goes 
in front, and the women follow, singing hymns 
in honour of Bacchus. They give a religious 
reason for the peculiarities of the image. 

49. Melampus, the son of Amytheon, cannot 
(I think) have been ignorant of this ceremony 
—nay, he must, I should conceive, have been 
well acquainted with it. He it was who intro¬ 
duced into Greece the name of Bacchus, the 
ceremonial of his worship, and the procession 
of the phallus. He did not, however, so com¬ 
pletely apprehend the whole doctrine as to be 
able to communicate it entirely, but various 
sages since his time have carried out his teach¬ 
ing to greater perfection. Still it is certain that 
Melampus introduced the phallus, and that the 
Greeks learnt from him the ceremonies which 
they now practise. I therefore maintain that 
Melampus, who was a wise man, and had ac¬ 
quired the art of divination, having become 
acquainted with the worship of Bacchus 
through knowledge derived from Egypt, intro¬ 
duced it into Cireece, with a lew slight changes, 


THE HISTORY 


60 HERODOTUS [Bookii 


at the same time that he brought In various 
other practices. For I can by no means allow 
that it is by mere coincidence that the Bacchic 
ceremonies in Greece are so nearly the same as 
the Egyptian—they would then have been 
more Greek in their character, and less recent 
in their origin. Much less can I admit that the 
Egyptians borrowed these customs, or any oth¬ 
er, from the Greeks. My belief is that Melam- 
pus got his knowledge of them from Cadmus 
the Tyrian, and the followers whom he 
brought from Phoenicia into the country which 
is now called Boeotia. 

50. Almost all the names of the gods came 
into Greece from Egypt. My inquiries prove 
tnat they were all derived from a foreign 
source, and my opinion is that Egypt furnished 
the greater number. For with the exception of 
Neptune and the Dioscuri, whom I mentioned 
above, and Juno, Vesta, Themis, the Graces, 
and the Nereids, the other gods have been 
known from time immemorial in Egypt. This 
I assert on the authority of the Egyptians them¬ 
selves. The gods, with whose names they pro¬ 
fess themselves unacquainted, the Greeks re¬ 
ceived, I believe, from the Pelasgi, except Nep¬ 
tune. Of him they got their knowledge from 
the Libyans, by whom he has been always hon¬ 
oured, and who were anciently the only people 
that had a god of the name. The Egyptians 
differ from the Greeks also in paying no divine 
honours to heroes. 

51. Besides these which have been here men¬ 
tioned, there are many other practices whereof 
I shall speak hereafter, which the Greeks have 
borrowed from Egypt. The peculiarity, how¬ 
ever, which they observe in their statues of 
Mercury they did not derive from the Egyp¬ 
tians, but from the Pelasgi; from them the 
Athenians first adopted it, and afterwards it 
passed from the Athenians to the other Greeks. 
For just at the time when the Athenians were 
entering into the Hellenic body, the Pelasgi 
came to live with them in their country, 
whence it was that the latter came first to be 
regarded as Greeks. Whoever has been init¬ 
iated into the mysteries of the Cabiri will un¬ 
derstand what I mean. The Samothracians re¬ 
ceived these mysteries from the Pelasgi, who, 
before they went to live in Attica, were dwell¬ 
ers in Samothrace, and imparted their religious 
ceremmnies to the inhabitants. The Athenians, 
then, who were the first of all the Greeks to 
make their statues of Mercury in this way, 
learnt the practice from the Pelasgians; and by 
this people a religious account of the matter is 


given, which is explained in the Samothracian ' 
mysteries. 

52. In early times the Pelasgi, as I know by | 

information which I got at Dodona, offered | 
sacrifices of all kinds, and prayed to the gods, 
but had no distinct names or appellations for 
them, since they had never heard of any. They 
called them gods ( 0€ot^ disposers), because 1 
they had disposed and arranged all things in such j 

a beautiful order. After a long lapse of time the 1 
names of the gods came to Greece from Egypt, 
and the Pelasgi learnt them, only as yet they 
knew nothing of Bacchus, of whom they first ‘ 
heard at a much later date. Not long after the I 
arrival of the names they sent to consult the 
oracle at Dodona about them. This is the most ' 
ancient oracle in Greece, and at that time there I 
was no other. To their question, “Whether : 
they should adopt the names that had been irn- | 
ported from the foreigners.^” the oracle replied 

by recommending their use. Thenceforth in ' 
their sacrifices the Pelasgi made use of the I' 
names of the gods, and from them the names 
passed afterwards to the Greeks. j 

53. Whence the gods severally sprang, 1 
whether or no they had all existed from eterni- ^ 
ty, what forms they bore—these are questions 

of which the Greeks knew nothing until the 
other day, so to speak. For Homer and Hesiod 1 
were the first to compose Theogonies, and give 
the gods their epithets, to allot them their sever¬ 
al offices and occupations, and describe their j 
forms; and they lived but four hundred years 1 
before my time, as I believe. As for the poets 1 
who are thought by some to be earlier than 
these, they are, in my judgment, decidedly later 
writers. In these matters I have the authority of 
the priestesses of Dodona for the former por¬ 
tion of my statements; what I have said of Ho¬ 
mer and Hesiod is my own opinion. 

54. The following tale is commonly told in 
Egypt concerning the oracle of Dodona in 
Greece, and that of Ammon in Libya. My in¬ 
formants on the point were the priests of Ju- 1 
piter at Thebes. They said “that two of the 
sarred women were once carried off from 
Thebes by the Phoenicians, and that the story 
went that one of them was sold into Libya, 
and the other into Greece, and these women 
were the first founders of the oracles in the 
two countries.” On my inquiring how they 
came to know so exactly what became of the 
women, they answered, “that diligent search 
had been made after them at the time, but that 

it had not been found possible to discover 
where they were; afterwards, however, they 





5062 ] THE HISTORY 61 


received the information which they had 
given me.” 

55. This was what I heard from the priests 
at Thebes; at Dodona, however, the women 
who deliver the oracles relate the matter as fol¬ 
lows:—“Two black doves flew away from 
Egyptian Thebes, and while one directed its 
flight to Libya, the other came to them. She 
alighted on an oak, and sitting there began to 
speak with a human voice, and told them that 
on the spot where she was, there should hence¬ 
forth be an oracle of Jove. They understood the 
announcement to be from heaven, so they set 
to work at once and erected the shrine. The 
dove which flew to Libya bade the Libyans to 
establish there the oracle of Ammon.” This 
likewise is an oracle of Jupiter. The persons 
from whom I received these particulars were 
three priestesses of the Dodonaeans, the eldest 
Promeneia, the next Timarete, and the young¬ 
est Nicandra—what they said was confirmed 
by the other Dodonaeans who dwell around the 
temple. 

56. My own opinion of these matters is as 
follows:—I think that, if it be true that the 
Phoenicians carried off the holy women, and 
sold them for slaves, the one into Libya and the 
other into Greece, or Pelasgia (as it was then 
called), this last must have been sold to the 
Thesprotians. Afterwards, while undergoing 
servitude in those parts, she built under a real 
oak a temple to Jupiter, her thoughts in her 
new abode reverting—as it was likely they 
would do, if she had been an attendant in a 
temple of Jupiter at Thebes—to that particular 
god. Then, having acquired a knowledge of 
the Greek tongue, she set up an oracle. She also 
mentioned that her sister had been sold for a 
slave into Libya by the same persons as herself. 

57. The Dodonxans called the women doves 
because they were foreigners, and seemed to 
them to make a noise like birds. After a while 
the dove spoke with a human voice, because 
the woman, whose foreign talk had previously 
sounded to them like the chattering of a bird, 
acquired the power of speaking what they 
could understand. For how can it be conceived 
possible that a dove should really speak with 
the voice of a man ? Lastly, by calling the dove 
black the Dodonaeans indicated that the wo¬ 
man was an Egyptian. And certainly the char¬ 
acter of the oracles at Thebes and Dodona is 
very similar. Besides this form of divination, 
the Greeks learnt also divination by means of 
victims from the Egyptians. 

58. The Egyptians were also the first to in¬ 


troduce solemn assemblies, processions, and 
litanies to the gods; of all which the Greeks 
were taught the use by them. It seems to me a 
sufficient proof of this that in Egypt these prac¬ 
tices have been established from remote antiq¬ 
uity, while in Greece they are only recently 
known. 

59. The Egyptians do not hold a single sol¬ 
emn assembly, but several in the course of the 
year. Of these the chief, which is better at¬ 
tended than any other, is held at the city of 
Bubastis in honour of Diana. The next in im¬ 
portance is that which takes place at Busiris, a 
city situated in the very middle of the Delta; it 
is in honour of Isis, who is called in the Greek 
tongue Demeter (Ceres). There is a third great 
festival in Sai’s to Minerva, a fourth in Helio¬ 
polis to the Sun, a fifth in Buto to Latona, and 
a sixth in Papremis to Mars. 

60. The following are the proceedings on 
occasion of the assembly at Bubastis:—Men 
and women come sailing all together, vast 
numbers in each boat, many of the women 
with castanets, which they strike, while some 
of the men pipe during the whole time of the 
voyage; the remainder of the voyagers, male 
and female, sing the while, and make a clap¬ 
ping with their hands. When they arrive op¬ 
posite any of the towns upon the banks of the 
stream, they approach the shore, and, while 
some of the women continue to play and sing, 
others call aloud to the females of the place and 
load them with abuse, while a certain number 
dance, and some standing up uncover them¬ 
selves. After proceeding in this way all along 
the river-course, they reach Bubastis, where 
they celebrate the feast with abundant sacri¬ 
fices. More grape-wine is consumed at this fes¬ 
tival than in all the rest of the year besides. The 
number of those who attend, counting only the 
men and women and omitting the children, 
amounts, according to the native reports, to 
seven hundred thousand. 

61. The ceremonies at the feast of Isis in the 
city of Busiris have been already spoken of. It 
is there that the whole multitude, both of men 
and women, many thousands in number, beat 
themselves at the close of the sacrifice, in hon¬ 
our of a god, whose name a religious scruple 
forbids me to mention.^ The Carian dwellers 
in Egypt proceed on this occasion to still 
greater lengths, even cutting their faces with 
their knives, whereby they let it been seen that 
they are not Egyptians but foreigners. 

62. At Sai's, when the assembly takes place 

^ Osiris. 


62 HERODOTUS [Book ii 


for the sacrifices, there Is one night on which 
the inhabitants all burn a multitude of lights 
in the open air round their houses. They use 
lamps in the shape of flat saucers filled with a 
mixture of oil and salt, on the top of which the 
wick floats. These burn the whole night, and 
give to the festival the name of the Feast of 
Lamps. The Egyptians who are absent from 
the festival observe the night of the sacrifice, no 
less than the rest, by a general lighting of 
lamps; so that the illumination is not confined 
to the city of Sais, but extends over the whole 
of Egypt. And there is a religious reason as¬ 
signed for the special honour paid to this night, 
as well as for the illumination which acccomp- 
anies it. 

63. At Heliopolis and Buto the assemblies 
are merely for the purpose of sacrifice; but at 
Papremis, besides the sacrifices and other rites 
which are performed there as elsewhere, the 
following custom is observed:—When the sun 
is getting low, a few only of the priests con¬ 
tinue occupied about the image of the god, 
while the greater number, armed with wooden 
clubs, take their station at the portal of the 
temple. Opposite to them is drawn up a body 
of men, in number above a thousand, armed, 
like the others, with clubs, consisting of per¬ 
sons engaged in the performance of their vows. 
The image of the god, which is kept in a small 
wooden shrine covered with plates of gold, is 
conveyed from the temple into a second sacred 
building the day before the festival begins. The 
few priests still in attendance upon the image 
place it, together with the shrine containing it, 
on a four-wheeled car, and begin to drag it 
along; the others stationed at the gateway of 
the temple, oppose its admission. Then the 
votaries come forward to espouse the quarrel of 
the god, and set upon the opponents, who are 
sure to offer resistance. A sharp fight with clubs 
ensues, in which heads are commonly broken 
on both sides. Many, I am convinced, die of the 
wounds that they receive, though the Egyp¬ 
tians insist that no one is ever killed. 

64. The natives give the subjoined account 
of this festival. They say that the mother of the 
god Mars once dwelt in the temple. Brought up 
at a distance from his parent, when he grew to 
man’s estate he conceived a wish to visit her. 
Accordingly he came, but the attendants, who 
had never seen him before, refused him en¬ 
trance, and succeeded in keeping him out. So 
he went to another city and collected a body of 
men, with whose aid he handled the attendants 
very roughly, and forced his way in to his 


mother. Hence they say arose the custom of a j 
fight with sticks in honour of Mars at this fes- 1 
tival. I 

The Egyptians first made It a point of re- | 
ligion to have no converse with women in the 
sacred places, and not to enter them without i 
washing, after such converse. Almost all other I 
nations, except the Greeks and the Egyptians, ; 
act differently, regarding man as in this matter 1 
under no other law than the brutes. Many an- | 
imals, they say, and various kinds of birds, may • 

be seen to couple in the temples and the sacred j 

precincts, which would certainly not happen 1 
if the gods were displeased at it. Such are the j 
arguments by which they defend their practice, 
but I nevertheless can by no means approve of ' 
it. In these points the Egyptians are specially 
careful, as they are indeed in everything which 
concerns their sacred edifices. I 

65. Egypt, though it borders upon Libya, is i 

not a region abounding in wild animals. The j 
animals that do exist in the country, whether [ 
domesticated or otherwise, are all regarded as p 
sacred. If I were to explain why they are con¬ 
secrated to the several gods, I should be led to L 
speak of religious matters, which I particularly 9 
shrink from mentioning; the points whereon I | 
have touched slightly hitherto have all been in¬ 
troduced from sheer necessity. Their custom 
with respect to animals Is as follows:—For I 
every kind there are appointed certain guard- I 
ians, some male, some female, whose business ' 
it is to look after them; and this honour is | 
made to descend from father to son. The in- i 
habitants of the various cities, when they have 1 

made a vow to any god, pay it to his animals in ] 

the way which I will now explain. At the time j 
of making the vow they shave the head of the 
child, cutting off all the hair, or else half, or 
sometimes a third part, which they then weigh 

in a balance against a sum of silver; and what¬ 
ever sum the hair weighs is presented to the 
guardian of the animals, who thereupon cuts 
up some fish, and gives it to them for food— 
such being the stuff whereon they are fed. 
When a man has killed one of the sacred ani- 1 
mals, if he did it with malice prepense, he is 
punished with death; if unwittingly, he has to 
pay such a fine as the priests choose to impose. 
When an ibis, however, or a hawk is killed, 
whether it was done by accident or on purpose, 
the man must needs die. 

66. The number of domestic animals in 
Egypt is very great, and would be still greater 
were it not for what befalls the cats. As the fe¬ 
males, when they have kittened, no longer seek 








63-71] THE HISTORY 63 


the company of the males, these last, to obtain 
once more their companionship, practise a 
curious artifice. They seize the kittens, carry 
them ofi, and kill them, but do not eat them 
afterwards. Upon this the females, being de¬ 
prived of their young, and longing to supply 
their place, seek the males once more, since 
they are particularly fond of their offspring. 
On every occasion of a fire in Egypt the strang¬ 
est prodigy occurs with the cats. The inhabi¬ 
tants allow the fire to rage as it pleases, while 
they stand about at intervals and watch these 
animals, which, slipping by the men or else 
leaping over them, rush headlong into the 
flames. When this happens, the Egyptians are 
in deep affliction. If a cat dies in a private house 
by a natural death, all the inmates of the house 
shave their eyebrows; on the death of a dog 
they shave the head and the whole of the body. 

67. The cats on their decease are taken to the 
city of Bubastis, where they are embalmed, 
after which they are buried in certain sacred 
repositories. The dogs are interred in the cities 
to which they belong, also in sacred burial- 
places. The same practice obtains with respect 
to the ichneumons; the hawks and shrew-mice, 
on the contrary, are conveyed to the city of 
Buto for burial, and the ibises to Hermopolis. 
The bears, which are scarce in Egypt, and the 
wolves, which are not much bigger than foxes, 
they bury wherever they happen to find them 

lying- 

68. The following are the peculiarities of the 
crocodile:—During the four winter months 
they eat nothing; they are four-footed, and live 
indifferently on land or in the water. The fe¬ 
male lays and hatches her eggs ashore, passing 
the greater portion of the day on dry land, but 
at night retiring to the river, the water of 
which is warmer than the night-air and the 
dew. Of all known animals this is the one 
which from the smallest size grows to be the 
greatest: for the egg of the crocodile is but little 
bigger than that of the goose, and the young 
crocodile is in proportion to the egg; yet when 
it is full grown, the animal measures frequent¬ 
ly seventeen cubits and even more. It has the 
eyes of a pig, teeth large and tusk-like, of a size 
proportioned to its frame; unlike any other an¬ 
imal, it is without a tongue; it cannot move its 
under-jaw, and in this respect too it is singular, 
being the only animal in the world which 
moves the upper-jaw but not the under. It has 
strong claws and a scaly skin, impenetrable 
upon the back. In the water it is blind, but on 
land it is very keen of sight. As it lives chiefly 


in the river, it has the inside of its mouth con¬ 
stantly covered with leeches; hence it happens 
that, while all the other birds and beasts avoid 
it, with the trochilus it lives at peace, since it 
owes much to that bird: for the crocodile, 
when he leaves the water and comes out upon 
the land, is in the habit of lying with his mouth 
wide open, facing the western breeze: at such 
times the trochilus goes into his mouth and de¬ 
vours the leeches. This benefits the crocodile, 
who is pleased, and takes care not to hurt the 
trochilus. 

69. The crocodile is esteemed sacred by some 
of the Egyptians, by others he is treated as an 
enemy. Those who live near Thebes, and those 
who dwell around Lake Moeris, regard them 
with especial veneration. In each of these places 
they keep one crocodile in particular, who is 
taught to be tame and tractable. They adorn 
his ears with ear-rings of molten stone or gold, 
and put bracelets on his fore-paws, giving him 
daily a set portion of bread, with a certain 
number of victims; and, after having thus 
treated him with the greatest possible attention 
v/hile alive, they embalm him when he dies 
and bury him in a sacred repository. The peo¬ 
ple of Elephantine on the other hand, are so far 
from considering these animals as sacred that 
they even eat their flesh. In the Egyptian lan¬ 
guage they are not called crocodiles, but 
Champsae. The name of crocodiles was given 
them by the lonians, who remarked their re¬ 
semblance to the lizards, which in Ionia live in 
the walls and are called crocodiles. 

70. The modes of catching the crocodile are 
many and various. I shall only describe the one 
which seems to me most worthy of mention. 
They bait a hook with a chine of pork and let 
the meat be carried out into the middle of the 
stream, while the hunter upon the bank holds 
a living pig, which he belabours. The croco¬ 
dile hears its cries, and making for the sound, 
encounters the pork, which he instantly swal¬ 
lows down. The men on the shore haul, and 
when they have got him to land, the first thing 
the hunter does is to plaster his eyes with mud. 
This once accomplished, the animal is des¬ 
patched with ease, otherwise he gives great 
trouble. 

71. The hippopotamus, in the canton of Pa- 
premis, is a sacred animal, but not in any other 
part of Egypt. It may be thus described:—It is 
a quadruped, cloven-footed, with hoofs like an 
ox, and a flat nose. It has the mane and tail of 
a horse, huge tusks which are very conspic¬ 
uous, and a voice like a horse’s neigh. In size 


64 HERODOTUS Book ii 


it equals the biggest oxen, and its skin is so 
tough that when dried it is made into javelins. 

72. Otters also are found in the Nile, and 
are considered sacred. Only two sorts of fish are 
venerated, that called the lepidotus and the eel. 
These are regarded as sacred to the Nile, as 
likewise among birds is the vulpanser, or fox- 
goose. 

73. They have also another sacred bird called 
the phoenix, which I myself have never seen, 
except in pictures. Indeed it is a great rarity, 
even in Egypt, only coming there (according 
to the accounts of the people of Heliopolis) 
once in five hundred years, when the old phoe¬ 
nix dies. Its size and appearance, if it is like 
the pictures, are as follow:—The plumage is 
partly red, partly golden, while the general 
make and size arc almost exactly that of the 
eagle. They tell a story of what this bird does, 
which does not seem to me to be credible: that 
he comes all the way from Arabia, and brings 
the parent bird, all plastered over with myrrh, 
to the temple of the Sun, and there buries the 
body. In order to bring him, they say, he first 
forms a ball of myrrh as big as he finds that he 
can carry; then he hollows out the ball, and 
puts his parent inside, after which he covers 
over the opening with fresh myrrh, and the 
ball is then of exactly the same weight as at 
first; so he brings it to Egypt, plastered over as 
I have said, and deposits it in the temple of the 
Sun. Such is the story they tell of the doings of 
this bird. 

74. In the neighbourhood of Thebes there are 
some sacred serpents which are perfectly harm¬ 
less. They are of small size, and have two horns 
growing out of the top of the head. These 
snakes, when they die, are buried in the temple 
of Jupiter, the god to whom they are sacred. 

75. I went once to a certain place in Arabia, 
almost exactly opposite the city of Buto, to 
make inquiries concerning the winged ser¬ 
pents. On my arrival I saw the back-bones and 
ribs of serpents in such numbers as it is im¬ 
possible to describe: of the ribs there were a 
multitude of heaps, some great, some small, 
some middle-sized. The place where the bones 
lie is at the entrance of a narrow gorge between 
steep mountains, which there open upon a 
spacious plain communicating with the great 
plain of Egypt. The story goes that with the 
spring the winged snakes come flying from 
Arabia towards Egypt, but are met in this 
gorge by the birds called ibises, who forbid 
their entrance and destroy them all. The Arab¬ 
ians assert, and the Egyptians also admit, that 


it is on account of the service thus rendered 
that the Egyptians hold the ibis in so much 
reverence. 

76. The ibis is a bird of a deep-black colour, 
with legs like a crane; its beak is strongly 
hooked, and its size is about that of the land¬ 
rail. This is a description of the black ibis 
which contends with the serpents. The com¬ 
moner sort, for there are two quite distinct 
species, has the head and the whole throat bare 
of feathers; its general plumage is white, but 
the head and neck are jet black, as also are the 
tips of the wings and the extremity of the tail; 
in its beak and legs it resembles the other spe¬ 
cies. The winged serpent is shaped like the 
water-snake. Its wings are not feathered, but 
resemble very closely those of the bat. And thus 
I conclude the subject of the sacred animals. 

77. With respect to the Egyptians them¬ 
selves, it is to be remarked that those who live 
in the corn country, devoting themselves, as 
they do, far more than any other people in the 
world, to the preservation of the memory of 
past actions, are the best skilled in history of 
any men that I have ever met. The following 
is the mode of life habitual to them:—For 
three successive days in each month they purge 
the body by means of emetics and clysters, 
which is done out of a regard for their health, 
since they have a persuasion that every disease 
to which men are liable is occasioned by the 
substances whereon they feed. Apart from any 
such precautions, they are, I believe, next to 
the Libyans, the healthiest people in the world 
—an effect of their climate, in my opinion, 
which has no sudden changes. Diseases almost 
always attack men when they are exposed to 
a change, and never more than during changes 
of the weather. They live on bread made of 
spelt, which they form .into loaves called in 
their own tongue cyllestis. Their drink is a 
wine which they obtain from barley, as they 
have no vines in their country. Many kinds of 
fish they eat raw, either salted or dried in the 
sun. Quails also, and ducks and small birds, 
they eat uncooked, merely first salting them. 
All other birds and fishes, excepting those 
which are set apart as sacred, are eaten either 
roasted or boiled. 

78. In social meetings among the rich, when 
the banquet is ended, a servant carries round 
to the several guests a coffin, in which there is 
a wooden image of a corpse, carved and paint¬ 
ed to resemble nature as nearly as possible, 
about a cubit or two cubits in length. As he 
shows it to each guest in turn, the servant says. 










72 - 86 ] THE HISTORY 65 


“Gaze here, and drink and be merry; for when 
you die, such will you be.” 

79. The Egyptians adhere to their own na¬ 
tional customs, and adopt no foreign usages. 
Many of these customs are worthy of note: 
among others their song, the Linus, which is 
sung under various names not only in Egypt 
but in Phoenicia, in Cyprus, and in other 
places; and which seems to be exactly the same 
as that in use among the Greeks, and by them 
called Linus. There were very many things in 
Egypt which filled me with astonishment, and 
this was one of them. Whence could the Egyp¬ 
tians have got the Linus It appears to have 
been sung by them from the very earliest times. 
For the Linus in Egyptian is called Maneros; 
and they told me that Maneros was the only 
son of their first king, and that on his untimely 
death he was honoured by the Egyptians with 
these dirgelike strains, and in this way they 
got their first and only melody. 

80. There is another custom in which the 
Egyptians resemble a particular Greek people, 
namely the Lacedaemonians. Their young men, 
when they meet their elders in the streets, give 
way to them and step aside; and if an elder 
come in where young men are present, these 
latter rise from their seats. In a third point they 
differ entirely from all the nations of Greece. 
Instead of speaking to each other when they 
meet in the streets, they make an obeisance, 
sinking the hand to the knee. 

81. They wear a linen tunic fringed about 
the legs, and called calasiris; over this they have 
a white woollen garment thrown on afterwards. 
Nothing of woollen, however, is taken into 
their temples or buried with them, as their re¬ 
ligion forbids it. Here their practice resembles 
the rites called Orphic and Bacchic, but which 
are in reality Egyptian and Pythagorean; for 
no one initiated in these mysteries can be 
buried in a woollen shroud, a religious reason 
being assigned for the observance. 

82. The Egyptians likewise discovered to 
which of the gods each month and day is sac¬ 
red; and found out from the day of a man’s 
birth what he will meet with in the course of 
his life, and how he will end his days, and what 
sort of man he will be—discoveries whereof 
the Greeks engaged in poetry have made a use. 
The Egyptians have also discovered more 
prognostics than all the rest of mankind be¬ 
sides. Whenever a prodigy takes place, they 
watch and record the result; then, if anything 
similar ever happens again, they expect the 
same consequences. 


83. With respect to divination, they hold 
that it is a gift which no mortal possesses, but 
only certain of the gods: thus they have an 
oracle of Hercules, one of Apollo, of Minerva, 
of Diana, of Mars, and of Jupiter. Besides 
these, there is the oracle of Latona at Buto. 
which is held in much higher repute than any 
of the rest. The mode of delivering the oracles 
is not uniform, but varies at the different 
shrines. 

84. Medicine is practised among them on a 
plan of separation; each physician treats a 
single disorder, and no more: thus the country 
swarms with medical practitioners, some un¬ 
dertaking to cure diseases of the eye, others of 
the head, others again of the teeth, others of 
the intestines, and some those which are not 
local. 

85. The following is the way in which they 
conduct their mournings and their funerals:— 
On the death in any house of a man of con¬ 
sequence, forthwith the women of the family 
beplaster their heads, and sometimes even 
their faces, with mud; and then, leaving the 
body indoors, sally forth and wander through 
the city, with their dress fastened by a band, 
and their bosoms bare, beating themselves as 
they walk. All the female relations join them 
and do the same. The men too, similarly be¬ 
girt, beat their breasts separately. When these 
ceremonies are over, the body is carried away 
to be embalmed. 

86. There are a set of men in Egypt who 
practice the art of embalming, and make it 
their proper business. These persons, when a 
body is brought to them, show the bearers vari¬ 
ous models of corpses, made in wood, and 
painted so as to resemble nature. The most per¬ 
fect is said to be after the manner of him whom 
I do not think it religious to name in connec¬ 
tion with such a matter; the second sort is in¬ 
ferior to the first, and less costly; the third is the 
cheapest of all. All this the embalmers explain, 
and then ask in which way it is wished that 
the corpse should be prepared. The bearers tell 
them, and having concluded their bargain, 
take their departure, while the embalmers, left 
to themselves, proceed to their task. The mode 
of embalming, according to the most perfect 
process, is the following:—They take first a 
crooked piece of iron, and with it draw out the 
brain through the nostrils, thus getting rid of 
a portion, while the skull is cleared of the rest 
by rinsing with drugs; next they make a cut 
along the flank with a sharp Ethiopian stone, 
and take out the whole contents of the abdo- 


66 HERODOTUS [ Book ii 


men, which they then cleanse, washing it thor¬ 
oughly with palm wine, and again frequently 
with an infusion of pounded aromatics. After 
this they fill the cavity with the purest bruised 
myrrh, with cassia, and every other sort of 
spicery except frankincense, and sew up the 
opening. Then the body is placed in natrum 
for seventy days, and covered entirely over. 
After the expiration of that space of time, 
which must not be exceeded, the body is 
washed, and wrapped round, from head to foot, 
with bandages of fine linen cloth, smeared over 
with gum, which is used generally by the Egyp¬ 
tians in the place of glue, and in this state it 
is given back to the relations, who enclose it in 
a wooden case which they have had made for 
the purpose, shaped into the figure of a man. 
Then fastening the case, they place it in a sepul¬ 
chral chamber, upright against the wall. Such 
is the most costly way of embalming the dead. 

87. If persons wish to avoid expense, and 
choose the second process, the following is the 
method pursued:—Syringes are filled with oil 
made from the cedar-tree, which is then, with¬ 
out any incision or disembowelling, injected 
into the abdomen. The passage by which it 
might be likely to return is stopped, and the 
body laid in natrum the prescribed number of 
days. At the end of the time the cedar-oil is al¬ 
lowed to make its escape; and such is its power 
that it brings with it the whole stomach and in¬ 
testines in a liquid state. The natrum mean¬ 
while has dissolved the flesh, and so nothing 
is left of the dead body but the skin and the 
bones. It is returned in this condition to the 
relatives, without any further trouble being be¬ 
stowed upon it. 

88. The third method of embalming, which 
is practised in the case of the poorer classes, is 
to clear out the intestines with a clyster, and let 
the body lie in natrum the seventy days, after 
which it is at once given to those who come to 
fetch it away. 

89. The wives of men of rank are not given 
to be embalmed immediately after death, nor 
indeed are any of the more beautiful and val¬ 
ued women. It is not till they have been dead 
three or four days that they are carried to the 
embalmers. This is done to prevent indignities 
from being ofiered them. It is said that once a 
case of this kind occurred: the man was de¬ 
tected by the information of his fellow-work¬ 
man. 

90. Whensoever any one, Egyptian or for¬ 
eigner, has lost his life by falling a prey to a 
crocodile, or by drowning in the river, the law 


compels the inhabitants of the city near which 
the body is cast up to have it embalmed, and to 
bury it in one of the sacred repositories with all 
possible magnificence. No one may touch the 
corpse, not even any of the friends or relatives, 
but only the priests of the Nile, who prepare it 
for burial with their own hands—regarding it 
as something more than the mere body of a 
man—and themselves lay it in the tomb. 

91. The Egyptians are averse to adopt Greek 
customs, or, in a word, those of any other na¬ 
tion. This feeling is almost universal among 
them. At Chemmis, however, which is a laige 
city in the Thebaic canton, near Neapolis, there 
is a square enclosure sacred to Perseus, son of 
Danae. Palm trees grow all round the place, 
which has a stone gateway of an unusual size, 
surmounted by two colossal statues, also in 
stone. Inside this precinct is a temple, and in 
the temple an image of Perseus. The people of 
Chemmis say that Perseus often appears to 
them, sometimes within the sacred enclosure, 
sometimes in the open country: one of the 
sandals which he has worn is frequently found 
—two cubits in length, as they affirm—and 
then all Egypt flourishes greatly. In the worship 
of Perseus Greek ceremonies are used; gym¬ 
nastic games are celebrated in his honour, com¬ 
prising every kind of contest, with prizes of 
cattle, cloaks, and skins. I made inquiries of the 
Chemmites why it was that Perseus appeared 
to them and not elsewhere in Egypt, and how 
they came to celebrate gymnastic contests un¬ 
like the rest of the Egyptians: to which they 
answered, “that Perseus belonged to their city 
by descent. Danaiis and Lynceus were Chem¬ 
mites before they set sail for Greece, and from 
them Perseus was descended,” they said, trac¬ 
ing the genealogy; “and he, when he came to 
Egypt for the purpose” ( which the Greeks also 
assign) “of bringing away from Libya the 
Gorgon's head, paid them a visit, and acknowl¬ 
edged them for his kinsmen—he had heard 
the name of their city from his mother before 
he left Greece—he bade them institute a gym¬ 
nastic contest in his honour, and that was the 
reason why they observed the practice.” 

92. The customs hitherto described are those 
of the Egyptians who live above the marsh- 
country. The inhabitants of the marshes have 
the same customs as the rest, as well in those 
matters which have been mentioned above as 
in respect of marriage, each Egyptian taking 
to himself, like the Greeks, a single wife; but 
for greater cheapness of living the marsh-men 
practise certain peculiar customs, such as these 









87 - 96 ] the history 67 


following. They gather the blossoms of a cer¬ 
tain water-lily, which grows in great abund¬ 
ance all over the flat country at the time when 
the Nile rises and floods the regions along its 
banks—the Egyptians call it the lotus—they 
gather, I say, the blossoms of this plant and dry 
them in the sun, after which they extract from 
the centre of each blossom a substance like the 
head of a poppy, which they crush and make 
into bread. The root of the lotus is likewise 
eatable, and has a pleasant sweet taste: it is 
round, and about the size of an apple. There 
is also another species of the lily in Egypt, 
which grows, like the lotus, in the river, and 
resembles the rose. The fruit springs up side 
by side with the blossom, on a separate stalk, 
and has almost exactly the look of the comb 
made by wasps. It contains a number of seeds, 
about the size of an olive-stone, which are 
good to eat: and these are eaten both green 
and dried. The byblus (papyrus), which grows 
year after year in the marshes, they pull up, 
and, cutting the plant in two, reserve the up¬ 
per portion for other purposes, but take the 
lower, which is about a cubit long, and either 
eat it or else sell it. Such as wish to enjoy the 
byblus in full perfection bake it first in a closed 
vessel, heated to a glow. Some of these folk, 
however, live entirely on fish, which are gutted 
as soon as caught, and then hung up in the 
sun: when dry, they are used as food. 

93. Gregarious fish are not found in any 
numbers in the rivers; they frequent the la- 
gunes, whence, at the season of breeding, they 
proceed in shoals towards the sea. The males 
lead the way, and drop their milt as they go, 
while the females, following close behind, ea¬ 
gerly swallow it down. From this they con¬ 
ceive,^ and when, after passing some time in 
the sea, they begin to be in spawn, the whole 
shoal sets off on its return to its ancient haunts. 
Now, however, it is no longer the males, but 
the females, who take the lead: they swim in 
front in a body, and do exactly as the males 
did before, dropping, little by little, their grains 
of spawn as they go, while the males in the 
rear devour the grains, each one of which is 
a fish. A portion of the spawn escapes and is 
not swallowed by the males, and hence come 
, the fishes which grow afterwards to maturity. 

When any of this sort of fish are taken on their 
, passage to the sea, they are found to have the 
I left side of the head scarred and bruised; while 

I if taken on their return, the marks appear on 
the right. The reason is that as they swim 
^ Aristotle shows the absurdity of this statement. 


down the Nile seaward, they keep close to the 
bank of the river upon their left, and returning 
again up stream they still cling to the same 
side, hugging it and brushing against it con¬ 
stantly, to be sure that they miss not their road 
through the great force of the current. When 
the Nile begins to rise, the hollows in the land 
and the marshy spots near the river are flooded 
before any other places by the percolation of 
the water through the riverbanks; and these, 
almost as soon as they become pools, are found 
to be full of numbers of little fishes. I think 
that I understand how it is this comes to pass. 
On the subsidence of the Nile the year before, 
though the fish retired with the retreating wa¬ 
ters, they had first deposited their spawn in 
the mud upon the banks; and so, when at the 
usual season the water returns, small fry are 
rapidly engendered out of the spawn of the 
preceding year. So much concerning the fish. 

94. The Egyptians who live in the marshes 
use for the anointing of their bodies an oil 
made from the fruit of the sillicyprium, which 
is known among them by the name of “kiki.” 
To obtain this they plant the sillicyprium 
(which grows wild in Greece) along the banks 
of the rivers and by the sides of the lakes, 
where it produces fruit in great abundance, 
but with a very disagreeable smell. This fruit 
is gathered, and then bruised and pressed, or 
else boiled down after roasting: the liquid 
which comes from it is collected and is found 
to be unctuous, and as well suited as olive-oil 
for lamps, only that it gives out an unpleasant 
odour. 

95. The contrivances which they use against 
gnats, wherewith the country swarms, are the 
following. In the parts of Egypt above the 
marshes the inhabitants pass the night upon 
lofty towers, which are of great service, as the 
gnats are unable to fly to any height on account 
of the winds. In the marsh-country, where 
there are no towers, each man possesses a net 
instead. By day it serves him to catch fish, 
while at night he spreads it over the bed in 
which he is to rest, and creeping in, goes to 
sleep underneath. The gnats, which, if he rolls 
himself up in his dress or in a piece of muslin, 
are sure to bite through the covering, do not 
so much as attempt to pass the net. 

96. The vessels used in Egypt for the trans¬ 
port of merchandise are made of the Acantha 
(Thorn), a tree which in its growth is very 
like the Cyrenaic lotus, and from which there 
exudes a gum. They cut a quantity of planks 
about two cubits in length from this tree, and 


68 HERODOTUS [Book ii 


then proceed to their ship-building, arranging 
the planks like bricks, and attaching them by 
ties to a number of long stakes or poles till the 
hull is complete, when they lay the cross-planks 
on the top from side to side. They give the 
boats no ribs, but caulk the seams with papyrus 
on the inside. Each has a single rudder, which 
is driven straight through the keel. The mast 
is a piece of acantha-wood, and the sails are 
made of papyrus. These boats cannot make 
way against the current unless there is a brisk 
breeze; they are, therefore, towed up-stream 
from the shore: down-stream they are man¬ 
aged as follows. There is a raft belonging to 
each, made of the wood of the tamarisk, fas¬ 
tened together with a wattling of reeds; and 
also a stone bored through the middle about 
two talents in weight. The raft is fastened to 
the vessel by a rope, and allowed to float down 
the stream in front, while the stone is attached 
by another rope astern. The result is that the 
raft, hurried forward by the current, goes rap¬ 
idly down the river, and drags the “baris” (for 
so they call this sort of boat) after it; while 
the stone, which is pulled along in the wake 
of the vessel, and lies deep in the water, keeps 
the boat straight. There are a vast number of 
these vessels in Egypt, and some of them are 
of many thousand talents’ burthen. 

97. When the Nile overflows, the country 
is converted into a sea, and nothing appears 
but the cities, which look like the islands in 
the Egean. At this season boats no longer keep 
the course of the river, but sail right across the 
plain. On the voyage from Naucratis to Mem¬ 
phis at this season, you pass close to the pyra¬ 
mids, whereas the usual course is by the apex 
of the Delta, and the city of Cercasorus. You 
can sail also from the maritime town of Cano¬ 
bus across the flat to Naucratis, passing by the 
cities of Anthylla and Archandropolis. 

98. The former of these cities, which is a 
place of note, is assigned expressly to the wife 
of the ruler of Egypt for the time being, to 
keep her in shoes. Such has been the custom 
ever since Egypt fell under the Persian yoke. 
The other city seems to me to have got its name 
of Archandropolis from Archander the 
Phthian, son of Achaeus, and son-in-law of 
Danaus. There might certainly have been an¬ 
other Archander; but, at any rate, the name is 
not Egyptian. 

99. Thus far I have spoken of Egypt from 
my own observation, relating what I myself 
saw, the ideas that I formed, and the results 
of my own researches. What follows rests on 


the accounts given me by the Egyptians, which 
I shall now repeat, adding thereto some par¬ 
ticulars which fell under by own notice. 

The priests said that Men was the first king 
of Egypt, and that it was he who raised the 
dyke which protects Memphis from the inun¬ 
dations of the Nile. Before his time the river 
flowed entirely along the sandy range of hills 
which skirts Egypt on the side of Libya. He, 
however, by banking up the river at the bend 
which it forms about a hundred furlongs south 
of Memphis, laid the ancient channel dry, 
while he dug a new course for the stream half¬ 
way between the two lines of hills. To this day, 
the elbow which the Nile forms at the point 
where it is forced aside into the new channel is 
guarded with the greatest care by the Persians, 
and strengthened every year; for if the river 
were to burst out at this place, and pour over 
the mound, there would be danger of Memphis 
being completely overwhelmed by the flood. 
Men, the first king, having thus, by turning the 
river, made the tract where it used to run, dry 
land, proceeded in the first place to build the 
city now called Memphis, which lies in the nar¬ 
row part of Egypt; after which he further ex¬ 
cavated a lake outside the town, to the north 
and west, communicating with the river, 
which was itself the eastern boundary. Besides 
these works, he also, the priests said, built the 
temple of Vulcan which stands within the city, 
a vast edifice, very worthy of mention. 

100. Next, they read me from a papyrus the 
names of three hundred and thirty monarchs, 
who (they said) were his successors upon the 
throne. In this number of generations there 
were eighteen Ethiopian kings, and one queen 
who was a native; all the rest were kings and 
Egyptians. The queen bore the same name as 
Jthe Babylonian princess, namely, Nitocris. 
They said that she succeeded her brother; he 
had been king of Egypt, and was put to death 
by his subjects, who then placed her upon the 
throne. Bent on avenging his death, she de¬ 
vised a cunning scheme by which she destroyed 
a vast number of Egyptians. She constructed a 
spacious underground chamber, and, on pre¬ 
tence of inaugurating it, contrived the follow¬ 
ing:—Inviting to a banquet those of the Egyp¬ 
tians whom she knew to have had the chief 
share in the murder of her brother, she sud¬ 
denly, as they were feasting, let the river in 
upon them, by means of a secret duct of large 
size. This, and this only, did they tell me of 
her, except that, when she had done as I have 
said, she threw herself into an apartment full 








97 'Io6] the history 69 


of ashes, that she might escape the vengeance 
whereto she would otherwise have been ex¬ 
posed. 

101. The other kings, they said, were per¬ 
sonages of no note or distinction, and left no 
monuments of any account, with the exception 
of the last, who was named Mceris. He left sev¬ 
eral memorials of his reign—the northern 
gateway of the temple of Vulcan, the lake ex¬ 
cavated by his orders, whose dimensions I shall 
give presently, and the pyramids built by him 
in the lake, the size of which will be stated 
when I describe the lake itself wherein they 
stand. Such were his works: the other kings 
left absolutely nothing. 

102. Passing over these monarchs, therefore, 
I shall speak of the king who reigned next, 
whose name was Sesostris. He, the priests said, 
first of all proceeded in a fleet of ships of war 
from the Arabian gulf along the shores of the 
Erythraean sea, subduing the nations as he 
went, until he finally reached a sea which 
could not be navigated by reason of the shoals. 
Hence he returned to Egypt, where, they told 
me, he collected a vast armament, and made a 
progress by land across the continent, conquer¬ 
ing every people which fell in his way. In the 
countries where the natives withstood his at¬ 
tack, and fought gallantly for their liberties, 
he erected pillars, on which he inscribed his 
own name and country, and how that he had 
here reduced the inhabitants to subjection by 
the might of his arms: where, on the contrary, 
they submitted readily and without a struggle, 
he inscribed on the pillars, in addition to these 
particulars, an emblem to mark that they were 
a nation of women, that is, unwarlike and ef¬ 
feminate. 

103. In this way he traversed the whole con¬ 
tinent of Asia, whence he passed on into Eu¬ 
rope, and made himself master of Scythia and 
of Thrace, beyond which countries I do not 
think that his army extended its march. For 
thus far the pillars which he erected are still 
visible, but in the remoter regions they are no 
longer found. Returning to Egypt from 
Thrace, he came, on his way, to the banks of 
the river Phasis. Here I cannot say with any 
certainty what took place. Either he of his own 
accord detached a body of troops from his 
main army and left them to colonise the coun¬ 
try, or else a certain number of his soldiers, 
wearied with their long wanderings, deserted, 
and established themselves on the banks of this 
stream. 

104. There can be no doubt that the Col- 


chians are an Egyptian race. Before I heard any 
mention of the fact from others, I had re¬ 
marked it myself. After the thought had struck 
me, I made inquiries on the subject both in 
Colchis and in Egypt, and I found that the Col- 
chians had a more distinct recollection of the 
Egyptians, than the Egyptians had of them. 
Still the Egyptians said that they believed the 
Colchians to be descended from the army of 
Sesostris. My own conjectures were founded, 
first, on the fact that they are black-skinned 
and have woolly hair, which certainly amounts 
to but little, since several other nations are so 
too; but further and more especially, on the 
circumstance that the Colchians, the Egyp¬ 
tians, and the Ethiopians, are the only nations 
who have practised circumcision from the ear¬ 
liest times. The Phoenicians and the Syrians of 
Palestine themselves confess that they learnt 
the custom of the Egyptians; and the Syrians 
who dwell about the rivers Thermodon and 
Parthenius, as well as their neighbours the 
Macronians, say that they have recently adopt¬ 
ed it from the Colchians. Now these are the 
only nations who use circumcision, and it is 
plain that they all imitate herein the Egyptians. 
With respect to the Ethiopians, indeed, I can¬ 
not decide whether they learnt the practice of 
the Egyptians, or the Egyptians of them—it is 
undoubtedly of very ancient date in Ethiopia 
—but that the others derived their knowledge 
of it from Egypt is clear to me from the fact 
that the Phoenicians, when they come to have 
commerce with the Greeks, cease to follow the 
Egyptians in this custom, and allow their chil¬ 
dren to remain uncircumcised. 

105. I will add a further proof to the iden¬ 
tity of the Egyptians and the Colchians. These 
two nations weave their linen in exactly the 
same way, and this is a way entirely unknown 
to the rest of the world; they also in their whole 
mode of life and in their language resemble 
one another. The Colchian linen is called by 
the Greeks Sardinian, while that which comes 
from Egypt is known as Egyptian. 

106. The pillars which Sesostris erected in 
the conquered countries have for the most part 
disappeared; but in the part of Syria called 
Palestine, I myself saw them still standing, 
with the writing above-mentioned, and the em¬ 
blem distinctly visible. In Ionia also, there are 
two representations of this prince engraved 
upon rocks, one on the road from Ephesus to 
Phocaea, the other between Sardis and Smyrna. 
In each case the figure is that of a man, four 
cubits and a span high, with a spear in his 




70 HERODOTUS f Book ii 


right hand and a bow in his left, the rest of his 
costume being likewise half Egyptian, half 
Ethiopian. There is an inscription across the 
breast from shoulder to shoulder, in the sacred 
character of Egypt, which says, “With my own 
shoulders 1 conquered this land.” The con¬ 
queror does not tell who he is, or whence he 
comes, though elsewhere Sesostris records these 
facts. Hence it has been imagined by some of 
those who have seen these forms, that they are 
figures of Memnon; but such as think so err 
very widely from the truth. 

107. This Sesostris, the priests went on to 
say, upon his return home, accompanied by 
vast multitudes of the people whose countries 
he had subdued, was received by his brother, 
whom he had made viceroy of Egypt on his de¬ 
parture, at Daphme near Pelusium, and invited 
by him to a banquet, which he attended, to¬ 
gether with his sons. Then his brother piled a 
quantity of wood all round the building, and 
having so done set it alight. Sesostris, discov¬ 
ering what had happened, took counsel in¬ 
stantly with his wife, who had accompanied 
him to the feast, and was advised by her to lay 
two of their six sons upon the fire, and so make 
a bridge across the flames, whereby the rest 
might effect their escape. Sesostris did as she 
recommendjed, and thus while two of his sons 
were burnt to death, he himself and his other 
children were saved. 

108. The king then returned to his own land 
and took vengeance upon his brother, after 
which he proceeded to make use of the multi¬ 
tudes whom he had brought with him from 
the conquered countries, partly to drag the 
huge masses of stone which were moved in the 
course of his reign to the temple of Vulcan— 
partly to dig the numerous canals with which 
the whole of Egypt is intersected. By these 
forced labours the entire face of the country 
was changed; for whereas Egypt had formerly 
been a region suited both for horses and car¬ 
riages, henceforth it became entirely unfit for 
either. Though a flat country throughout its 
whole extent, it is now unfit for either horse or 
carriage, being cut up by the canals, which are 
extremely numerous and run in all directions. 
The king’s object was to supply Nile water to 
the inhabitants of the towns situated in the 
mid-country, and not lying upon the river; for 
previously they had been obliged, after the sub¬ 
sidence of the floods, to drink a brackish water 
which they obtained from wells. 

109. Sesostris also, they declared, made a di¬ 
vision of the soil of Egypt among the inhabi¬ 


tants, assigning square plots of ground of equal 
size to all, and obtaining his chief revenue 
from the rent which the holders were required 
to pay him year by year. If the river carried 
away any portion of a man’s lot, he appeared 
before tbe king, and related what had hap¬ 
pened; upon which the king sent persons to 
examine, and determine by measurement the 
exact extent of the loss; and thenceforth only 
such a rent was demanded of him as was pro¬ 
portionate to the reduced size of his land. 
From this practice, I think, geometry first came ' 
to be known in Egypt, whence it passed into 
Greece. The sun-dial, however, and the gno- I 
mon with the division of the day into twelve ^ 
parts, were received by the Greeks from the i 
Babylonians. ' 

no. Sesostris was king not only of Egypt, 4 
but also of Ethiopia. He was the only Egyp- i 
tian monarch who ever ruled over the latter 1 
country. He left, as memorials of his reign, the 
stone statues which stand in front of the tem¬ 
ple of Vulcan, two of which, representing him- ' 
self and his wife, are thirty cubits in height, ' 
while the remaining four, which represent his 
sons, are twenty cubits. These are the statues, in , 
front of which the priest of Vulcan, very many 
years afterwards, would not allow Darius the 
Persian to place a statue of himself; “because,” 
he said, “Darius had not equalled the achieve- 1 
ments of Sesostris the Egyptian: for while Se¬ 
sostris had subdued to the full as many nations I 
as ever Darius had brought under, he had like- 1 
wise conquered the Scythians, whom Darius 
had failed to master. It was not fair, therefore, 
that he should erect his statue in front of the t 
offerings of a king, whose deeds he had been 
unable to surpass.” Darius, they say, pardoned 
the freedom of this speech. j 

III. On the death of Sesostris, his son Phe- | 
ron, the priests said, mounted the throne. He 
undertook no warlike expeditions; being 
struck with blindness, owing to the following | 
circumstance. The river had swollen to the un- 1 
usual height of eighteen cubits, and had over- I 
flowed all the fields, when, a sudden wind aris- 1 
ing, the water rose in great waves. Then the 
king, in a spirit of impious violence, seized 
his spear, and hurled it into the strong eddies 
of the stream. Instantly he was smitten with I 
disease of the eyes, from which after a little 
while he became blind, continuing without I 
the power of vision for ten years. At last, in the I 
eleventh year, an oracular announcement 
reached him from the city of Buto, to the effect, 
that “the time of his punishment had run out. 






107-1151 the history 71 


and he should recover his sight by washing his 
eyes with urine. He must find a woman who 
had been faithful to her husband, and had nev¬ 
er preferred to him another man.” The king, 
therefore, first of all made trial of his wife, but 
to no purpose—he continued as blind as before. 
So he made the experiment with other women, 
until at length he succeeded, and in this way 
recovered his sight. Hereupon he assembled all 
the women, except the last, and bringing them 
to the city which now bears the name of Ery- 
thraboliis (Red-soil), he there burnt them all, 
together with the place itself. The woman to 
whom he owed his cure, he married, and after 
his recovery was complete, he presented offer¬ 
ings to all the temples of any note, among 
which the best worthy of mention are the two 
stone obelisks which he gave to the temple of 
the Sun. These are magnificent works; each is 
made of a single stone, eight cubits broad, and 
a hundred cubits in height. 

112. Pheron, they said, was succeeded by a 
man of Memphis, whose name, in the language 
of the Greeks, was Proteus. There is a sacred 
precinct of this king in Memphis, which is very 
beautiful, and richly adorned, situated south 
of the great temple of Vulcan. Phoenicians 
from the city of Tyre dwell all round this pre¬ 
cinct, and the whole place is known by the 
name of “the camp of the Tyrians.” Within the 
enclosure stands a temple, which is called that 
of Venus the Stranger. I conjecture the build¬ 
ing to have been erected to Helen, the daugh¬ 
ter of Tyndarus; first, because she, as I have 
heard say, passed some time at the court of Pro¬ 
teus; and secondly, because the temple is dedi¬ 
cated to Venus the Stranger; for among all the 
many temples of Venus there is no other where 
the goddess bears this title. 

113. The priests, in answer to my inquiries 
on the subject of Helen, informed me of the 
following particulars. When Alexander had 
carried off Helen from Sparta, he took ship and 
sailed homewards. On his way across the Egean 
a gale arose, which drove him from his course 
and took him down to the sea of Egypt; hence, 
as the wind did not abate, he was carried on to 
the coast, when he went ashore, landing at the 
Salt-Pans, in that mouth of the Nile which is 
now called the Canobic. At this place there 
stood upon the shore a temple, which still ex¬ 
ists, dedicated to Hercules. If a slave runs away 
from his master, and taking sanctuary at this 
shrine gives himself up to the god, and receives 
certain sacred marks upon his person, whoso¬ 
ever his master may be, he cannot lay hand on 


him. This law still remained unchanged to my 
time. Hearing, therefore, of the custom of the 
place, the attendants of Alexander deserted 
him, and fled to the temple, where they sat as 
suppliants. While there, wishing to damage 
their master, they accused him to the Egyp¬ 
tians, narrating all the circumstances of the 
rape of Helen and the wrong done to Mene- 
laus. These charges they brought, not only 
before the priests, but also before the warden 
of that mouth of the river, whose name was 
Thonis. 

114. As soon as he received the intelligence. 
Thonis sent a message to Proteus, who was at 
Memphis, to this effect: “A stranger is arrived 
from Greece; he is by race a Teucrian, and has 
done a wicked deed in the country from which 
he is come. Having beguiled the wife of the 
man whose guest he was, he carried her away 
with him, and much treasure also. Compelled 
by stress of weather, he has now put in here. 
Are we to let him depart as he came, or shall 
we seize what he has brought.?” Proteus re¬ 
plied, “Seize the man, be he who he may, that 
has dealt thus wickedly with his friend, and 
bring him before me, that I may hear what he 
will say for himself.” 

115. Thonis, on receiving these orders, ar¬ 
rested Alexander, and stopped the departure 
of his ships; then, taking with him Alexander, 
Helen, the treasures, and also the fugitive 
slaves, he went up to Memphis. When all were 
arrived, Proteus asked Alexander, “who he 
was, and whence he had come.?” Alexander re¬ 
plied by giving his descent, the name of his 
country, and a true account of his late voyage. 
Then Proteus questioned him as to how he got 
possession of Helen. In his reply Alexander be¬ 
came confused, and diverged from the truth, 
whereon the slaves interposed, confuted his 
statements, and told the whole history of the 
crime. Finally, Proteus delivered judgment as 
follows: “Did I not regard it as a matter of the 
utmost consequence that no stranger driven to 
my country by adverse winds should ever be 
put to death, I would certainly have avenged 
the Greek by slaying thee. Thou basest of men, 
—after accepting hospitality, to do so wicked a 
deed! First, thou didst seduce the wife of thy 
own bost—then, not content therewith, thou 
must violently excite her mind, and steal her 
away from her husband. Nay, even so thou 
wert not satisfied, but on leaving, thou must 
plunder the house in which thou hadst been a 
guest. Now then, as I think it of the greatest 
importance to put no stranger to death, I suffer 


72 HERODOTUS [Bookii 


thee to depart; but the woman and the treas¬ 
ures I shall not permit to be carried away. Here 
they must stay, till the Greek stranger comes in 
person and takes them back with him. For thy¬ 
self and thy companions, I command thee to 
begone from my land within the space of three 
days—and I warn you, that otherwise at the 
end of that time you will be treated as ene¬ 
mies.” 

116. Such was the tale told me by the priests 
concerning the arrival of Helen at the court of 
Proteus. It seems to me that Homer was ac¬ 
quainted with this story, and while discarding 
it, because he thought it less adapted for epic 
poetry than the version which he followed, 
showed that it was not unknown to him. This 
is evident from the travels which he assigns to 
Alexander in the Iliad —and let it be borne in 
mind that he has nowhere else contradicted 
himself—making him be carried out of his 
course on his return with Helen, and after di¬ 
vers wanderings come at last to Sidon in Phoe¬ 
nicia. The passage is in the Bravery of Dio- 
med,^ and the words are as follows:— 

There were the robes, many-coloured, the wor\ 
of Sidonian women: 

They from Sidon had come, what time god¬ 
shaped Alexander 

Over the broad sea brought, that way, the high¬ 
born Helen. 

In the Odyssey also the same fact is alluded 
to, in these words— 

Such, so wisely prepared, were the drugs that her 
stores afforded. 

Excellent; gift which once Polydamna, partner of 
Thonis, 

Gave her in Egypt, where many the simples that 
grow in the meadows. 

Potent to cure in part, in part as potent to injure. 

Menelaus too, in the same poem, thus ad¬ 
dresses Telemachus:^— 

Much did I long to return, but the Gods still \ept 
me in Egypt — 

Angry because I had failed to pay them their hec¬ 
atombs duly. 

In these places Homer shows himself ac¬ 
quainted with the voyage of Alexander to 
Egypt, for Syria borders on Egypt, and the 
Phoenicians, to whom Sidon belongs, dwell in 
Syria. 

117. From these various passages, and from 
that about Sidon especially, it is clear that Ho¬ 
mer did not write the Cypria. For there it is 

^ Iliad, Bk vi. 290-292. 

2 Odyssey, Bk iv. 227-230. 

^ Ibid., Bk iv. 351-352. 


said that Alexander arrived at Ilium with Hel- ' 1 
en on the third day after he left Sparta, the ' I 
wind having been favourable, and the sea 1 
smooth; whereas in the Iliad, the poet makes i| 
him wander before he brings her home, ‘j 
Enough, however, for the present of Homer r 
and the Cypria. 

118. I made inquiry of the priests whether r- 
the story which the Greeks tell about Ilium is [ 
a fable, or no. In reply they related the follow¬ 
ing particulars, of which they declared that j 
Menelaus had himself informed therti. After 1 ; 
the rape of Helen, a vast army of Greeks, wish- ^' 
ing to render help to Menelaus, set sail for the | 
Teucrian territory; on their arrival they disem- 11 
barked, and formed their camp, after which 
they sent ambassadors to Ilium, of whom Men- \\ 
elaus was one. The embassy was received with- d 
in the walls, and demanded the restoration of I- 
Helen with the treasures which Alexander had [i 
carried of?, and likewise required satisfaction b 
for the wrong done. The Teucrians gave at 
once the answer in which they persisted ever U 
afterwards, backing their assertions sometimes || 
even with oaths, to wit, that neither Helen, nor | 
the treasures claimed, were in their possession, |!j 
—both the one and the other had remained, Pj 
they said, in Egypt; and it was not just to come |i 
upon them for what Proteus, king of Egypt, t 
was detaining. The Greeks, imagining that the I 
Teucrians were merely laughing at them, laid f 
siege to the town, and never rested until they 
finally took it. As, however, no Helen was i 
found, and they were still told the same story, ' 
they at length believed in its truth, and des- i 
patched Menelaus to the court of Proteus. 

119. So Menelaus travelled to Egypt, and on ' 
his arrival sailed up the river as far as Mem- ' 
phis, and related all that had happened. He 
met with the utmost hospitality, received Hel- ' 
en back unharmed, and recovered all his treas- 1 
ures. After this friendly treatment Menelaus, I 
they said, behaved most unjustly towards the \ 
Egyptians; for as it happened that at the time I 
when he wanted to take his departure, he was ‘ 
detained by the wind being contrary, and as I 
he found this obstruction continue, he had re- i 
course to a most wicked expedient. He seized, 
they said, two children of the people of the 
country, and offered them up in sacrifice. I 
When this became known, the indignation of | 
the people was stirred, and they went in pur¬ 
suit of Menelaus, who, however, escaped with 
his ships to Libya, after which the Egyptians 
could not say whither he went. The rest they 
knew full well, partly by the inquiries which 





Ii6-I2I ] 

they had made, and partly from the circum¬ 
stances having taken place in their own land, 
and therefore not admitting of doubt. 

120. Such is the account given by the Egyp¬ 
tian priests, and I am myself inclined to regard 
as true all that they say of Helen from the fol¬ 
lowing considerations:—If Helen had been at 
Troy, the inhabitants would, I think, have giv¬ 
en her up to the Greeks, whether Alexander 
consented to it or no. For surely neither Priam, 
nor his family, could have been so infatuated 
as to endanger their own persons, their chil¬ 
dren, and their city, merely that Alexander 
might possess Helen. At any rate, if they de¬ 
termined to refuse at first, yet afterwards when 
so many of the Trojans fell on every encounter 
with the Greeks, and Priam too in each battle 
lost a son, or sometimes two, or three, or even 
more, if we may credit the epic poets, I do not 
believe that even if Priam himself had been 
married to her he would have declined to de¬ 
liver her up, with the view of bringing the se¬ 
ries of calamities to a close. Nor was it as if 
Alexander had been beir to the crown, in 
which case he might have had the chief man¬ 
agement of affairs, since Priam was already 
old. Hector, who was his elder brother, and a 
far braver man, stood before him, and was the 
heir to the kingdom on the death of their fa¬ 
ther Priam. And it could not be Hector’s inter¬ 
est to uphold his brother in his wrong, when 
it brought such dire calamities upon himself 
and the other Trojans. But the fact was that 
they had no Helen to deliver, and so they told 
the Greeks, but the Greeks would not believe 
what they said—Divine Providence, as I think, 
so willing, that by their utter destruction it 
might be made evident to all men that when 
great wrongs are done, the gods will surely 
visit them with great punishments. Such, at 
least, is my view of the matter. 

121. (i.) When Proteus died, Rhampsini- 
tus, the priests informed me, succeeded to the 
throne. His monuments were the western 
gateway of the temple of Vulcan, and the two 
statues which stand in front of this gateway, 
called by the Egyptians, the one Summer, the 
other Winter, each twenty-five cubits in height. 
The statue of Summer, which is the northern¬ 
most of the two, is worshipped by the natives, 
and has offerings made to it; that of Winter, 
which stands towards the south, is treated in 
exactly the contrary way. King Rhampsinitus 
was possessed, they said, of great riches in sil¬ 
ver—indeed to such an amount, that none of 
the princes, his successors, surpassed or even 


73 

equalled his wealth. For the better custody of 
this money, he proposed to build a vast cham¬ 
ber of hewn stone, one side of which was to 
form a part of the outer wall of his palace. The 
builder, therefore, having designs upon the 
treasures, contrived, as he was making the 
building, to insert in this wall a stone, which 
could easily be removed from its place by two 
men, or even by one. So the chamber was fin¬ 
ished, and the king’s money stored away in it. 
Time passed, and the builder fell sick, when 
finding his end approaching, he called for his 
two sons, and related to them the contrivance 
he had made in the king’s treasure-chamber, 
telling them it was for their sakes he had done 
it, that so they might always live in affluence. 
Then he gave them clear directions concerning 
the mode of removing the stone, and commun¬ 
icated the measurements, bidding them care¬ 
fully keep the secret, whereby they would be 
Comptrollers of the Royal Exchequer so long 
as they lived. Then the father died, and the 
sons were not slow in setting to work: they 
went by night to the palace, found the stone in 
the wall of the building, and having removed 
it with ease, plundered the treasury of a round 
sum. 

(2.) When the king next paid a visit to the 
apartment, he was astonished to see that the 
money was sunk in some of the vessels wherein 
it was stored away. Whom to accuse, however, 
he knew not, as the seals were all perfect, and 
the fastenings of the room secure. Still each 
time that he repeated his visits, he found that 
more money was gone. The thieves in truth 
never stopped, but plundered the treasury ever 
more and more. At last the king determined to 
have some traps made, and set near the vessels 
which contained his wealth. This was done, 
and when the thieves came, as usual, to the 
treasure-chamber, and one of them entering 
through the aperture, made straight for the 
jars, suddenly he found himself caught in one 
of the traps. Perceiving that he was lost, he in¬ 
stantly called his brother, and telling him what 
had happened, entreated him to enter as quick¬ 
ly as possible and cut ofi his head, that when 
his body should be discovered it might not be 
recognised, which would have the efiect of 
bringing ruin upon both. The other thief 
thought the advice good, and was persuaded 
to follow it—then, fitting the stone into its 
place, he went home, taking with him his 
brother’s head. 

(3.) When day dawned, the king came into 
the room, and marvelled greatly to see the 


THE HISTORY 


74 HERODOlUS [Book ii 


body of the thief in the trap without a head, 
while the building was still whole, and neither 
entrance nor exit was to be seen anywhere. In 
this perplexity he commanded the body of the 
dead man to be hung up outside the palace 
wall, and set a guard to watch it, with orders 
that if any persons were seen weeping or la¬ 
menting near the place, they should be seized 
and brought before him. When the mother 
heard of this exposure of the corpse of her son, 
she took it sorely to heart, and spoke to her sur¬ 
viving child, bidding him devise some plan or 
other to get back the body, and threatening, 
that if he did not exert himself, she would go 
herself to the king, and denounce him as the 
robber. 

(4.) The son said all he could to persuade 
her to let the matter rest, but in vain; she still 
continued to trouble him, until at last he yield¬ 
ed to her importunity, and contrived as fol¬ 
lows:—Filling some skins with wine, he load¬ 
ed them on donkeys, which he drove before 
him till he came to the place where the guards 
were watching the dead body, when pulling 
two or three of the skins towards him, he un¬ 
tied some of the necks which dangled by the 
asses’ sides. The wine poured freely out, where¬ 
upon he began to beat his head, and shout with 
all his might, seeming not to know which of 
the donkeys he should turn to first. When the 
guards saw the wine running, delighted to 
profit by the occasion, they rushed one and all 
into the road, each with some vessel or other, 
and caught the liquor as it was spilling. The 
driver pretended anger, and loaded them with 
abuse; whereon they did their best to pacify 
him, until at last he appeared to soften, and re¬ 
cover his good humour, drove his asses aside out 
of the road, and set to work to rearrange their 
burthens; meanwhile, as he talked and chatted 
with the guards, one of them began to rally 
him, and make him laugh, whereupon he gave 
them one of the skins as a gift. They now made 
up their minds to sit down and have a drink¬ 
ing-bout where they were, so they begged him 
to remain and drink with them. Then the man 
let himself be persuaded, and stayed. As the 
drinking went on, they grew very friendly to¬ 
gether, so presently he gave them another 
skin, upon which they drank so copiously that 
they were all overcome with the liquor, and 
growing drowsy lay down, and fell asleep 
on the spot. The thief waited till it was the 
dead of the night, and then took down the 
body of his brother; after which, in mockery, 
he shaved off the right side of all the soldiers’ 


beards,* and so left them. Laying his brother’s 
body upon the asses, he carried it home to his , 
mother, having thus accomplished the thing I 
that she had required of him. 

(5.) When it came to the king’s ears that 1 
the thief’s body was stolen away, he was sorely . 
vexed. Wishing, therefore, whatever it might | 
cost, to catch the man who had contrived the | 
trick, he had recourse (the priests said) to an | 
expedient, which I can scarcely credit. He sent 
his own daughter to the common stews, with 
orders to admit all comers, but to require every 
man to tell her what was the cleverest and 
wickedest thing he had done in the whole 
course of his life. If any one in reply told her 
the story of the thief, she was to lay hold of him 
and not allow him to get away. The daughter 
did as her father willed, whereon the thief, : 
who was well aware of the king’s motive, felt I 
a desire to outdo him in craft and cunning. Ac- I 
cordingly he contrived the following plan:— I 
He procured the corpse of a man lately dead, 
and cutting off one of the arms at the shoulder, 
put it under his dress, and so went to the king’s 
daughter. When she put the question to him as 
she had done to all the rest, he replied that the I 
wickedest thing he had ever done was cutting ' 
off the head of his brother when he was caught |i 
in a trap in the king’s treasury, and the clever- ' 
est was making the guards drunk and carrying | 
off the body. As he spoke, the princess caught | 
at him, but the thief took advantage of the 
darkness to hold out to her the hand of the 
corpse. Imagining it to be his own hand, she 
seized and held it fast; while the thief, leaving 
it in her grasp, made his escape by the door. 

(6.) The king, when word was brought t 
him of this fresh success, amazed at the sa¬ 
gacity and boldness of the man, sent messen¬ 
gers to all the towns in his dominions to pro¬ 
claim a free pardon for the thief, and to prom- < 
ise him a rich reward, if he came and made H 
himself known. The thief took the king at his i 
word, and came boldly into his presence; i 
whereupon Rhampsinitus, greatly admiring ; 
him, and looking on him as the most knowing 
of men, gave him his daughter in marriage. 
“The Egyptians,” he said, “excelled all the rest 
of the world in wisdom, and this man excelled 
all other Egyptians.” 

* This is a curious mistake for any one to make I 
who had been in Egypt, since the soldiers had no 
beards, and it was the custom of all classes to 
shave. Herodotus could not have learnt this story 
from the Egyptians, and it is evidently from a 
Greek source. 







121-125] THE HISTORY 75 


122. The same king, I was also informed by 
the priests, afterwards descended alive into the 
region which the Greeks call Hades, and there 
played at dice with Ceres, sometimes winning 
and sometimes suffering defeat. After a while 
he returned to earth, and brought with him a 
golden napkin, a gift which he had received 
from the goddess. From this descent of Rham- 
psinitus into Hades, and return to earth again, 
the Egyptians, I was told, instituted a festival, 
which they certainly celebrated in my day. On 
what occasion it was that they instituted it, 
whether upon this or upon any other, I cannot 
determine. The following are the ceremonies: 
—On a certain day in the year the priests 
weave a mantle, and binding the eyes of one of 
their number with a fillet, they put the mantle 
upon him, and take him with them into the 
roadway conducting to the temple of Ceres, 
when they depart and leave him to himself. 
Then the priest, thus blindfolded, is led (they 
say) by two wolves to the temple of Ceres, dis¬ 
tant twenty furlongs from the city, where he 
stays awhile, after which he is brought back 
from the temple by the wolves, and left upon 
the spot where they first joined him. 

123. Such as think the tales told by the Egyp¬ 
tians credible are free to accept them for his¬ 
tory. For my own part, I propose to myself 
throughout my whole work faithfully to record 
the traditions of the several nations. The Egyp¬ 
tians maintain that Ceres and Bacchus preside 
in the realms below. They were also the first 
to broach the opinion that the soul of man is 
immortal, and that, when the body dies, it en¬ 
ters into the form of an animal which is born 
at the moment, thence passing on from one an¬ 
imal into another, until it has circled through 
the forms of all the creatures which tenant the 
earth, the water, and the air, after which it en¬ 
ters again into a human frame, and is born 
anew. The whole period of the transmigration 
is (they say) three thousand years. There are 
Greek writers, some of an earlier, some of a 
later date, who have borrowed this doctrine 
from the Egyptians, and put it forward as their 
own. I could mention their names, but I ab¬ 
stain from doing so. 

124. Till the death of Rhampsinitus, the 
priests said, Egypt was excellently governed, 
and flourished greatly; but after him Cheops 
succeeded to the throne, and plunged into all 
manner of wickedness. He closed the temples, 
and forbade the Egyptians to offer sacrifice, 
compelling them instead to labour, one and all, 
in his service. Some were required to drag 


blocks of stone down to the Nile from the 
quarries in the Arabian range of hills; others 
received the blocks after they had been con¬ 
veyed in boats across the river, and drew them 
to the range of hills called the Libyan. A hun¬ 
dred thousand men laboured constantly, and 
were relieved every three months by a fresh 
lot. It took ten years’ oppression of the people 
to make the causeway for the conveyance of the 
stones, a work not much inferior, in my judg¬ 
ment, to the pyramid itself. This causeway is 
five furlongs in length, ten fathoms wide, and 
in height, at the highest part, eight fathoms. It 
is built of polished stone, and is covered with 
carvings of animals. To make it took ten years, 
as I said—or rather to make the causeway, the 
works on the mound where the pyramid 
stands, and the underground chambers, which 
Cheops intended as vaults for his own use: 
these last were built on a sort of island, sur¬ 
rounded by water introduced from the Nile by 
a canal. The pyramid itself was twenty years 
in building. It is a square, eight hundred feet 
each way, and the height the same, built en¬ 
tirely of polished stone, fitted together with the 
utmost care. The stones of which it is com¬ 
posed are none of them less than thirty feet in 
length. 

125. The pyramid was built in steps, battle¬ 
ment-wise, as it is called, or, according to oth¬ 
ers, altar-wise. After laying the stones for the 
base, they raised the remaining stones to their 
places by means of machines formed of short 
wooden planks. The first machine raised them 
from the ground to the top of the first step. On 
this there was another machine, which received 
the stone upon its arrival, and conveyed it to 
the second step, whence a third machine ad¬ 
vanced it still higher. Either they had as many 
machines as there were steps in the pyramid, 
or possibly they had but a single machine, 
which, being easily moved, was transferred 
from tier to tier as the stone rose—both ac¬ 
counts are given, and therefore I mention both. 
The upper portion of the pyramid was finished 
first, then the middle, and finally the part 
which was lowest and nearest the ground. 
There is an inscription in Egyptian characters 
on the pyramid which records the quantity of 
radishes, onions, and garlic consumed by the 
labourers who constructed it; and I perfectly 
well remember that the interpreter who read 
the writing to me said that the money ex¬ 
pended in this wav vvas 1600 talents of silver. 
If this then is a true record, what a vast sum 
must have been spent on the iron tools used in 


76 HERODOTUS [Book ii || 


the work, and on the feeding and clothing of 
the labourers, considering the length of time 
the work lasted, which has already been stated, 
and the additional time—no small space, I im¬ 
agine—which must have been occupied by the 
quarrying of the stones, their conveyance, and 
the formation of the underground apartments. 

126. The wickedness of Cheops reached to 
such a pitch that, when he had spent all his 
treasures and wanted more, he sent his daugh¬ 
ter to the stews, with orders to procure him a 
certain sum—how much I cannot say, for I was 
not told; she procured it, however, and at the 
same time, bent on leaving a monument which 
should perpetuate her own memory, she re¬ 
quired each man to make her a present of a 
stone towards the works which she contem¬ 
plated. With these stones she built the pyramid 
which stands midmost of the three that are in 
front of the great pyramid, measuring along 
each side a hundred and fifty feet. 

127. Cheops reigned, the Egyptians said, fif¬ 
ty years, and was succeeded at his demise by 
Chephren, his brother. 

Chephren imitated the conduct of his prede¬ 
cessor, and, like him, built a pyramid, which 
did not, however, equal the dimensions of his 
brother’s. Of this I am certain, for I measured 
them both myself. It has no subterraneous 
apartments, nor any canal from the Nile to sup¬ 
ply it with water, as the other pyramid has. In 
that, the Nile water, introduced through an 
artificial duct, surrounds an island, where the 
body of Cheops is said to lie. Chephren built 
his pyramid close to the great pyramid of Che¬ 
ops, and of the same dimensions, except that he 
lowered the height forty feet. For the basement 
he employed the many-coloured stone of Ethi¬ 
opia. These two pyramids stand both on the 
same hill, an elevation not far short of a hun¬ 
dred feet in height. The reign of Chephren 
lasted fifty-six years. 

128. Thus the affliction of Egypt endured 
for the space of one hundred and six years, dur¬ 
ing the whole of which time the temples were 
shut up and never opened. The Egyptians so 
detest the memory of these kings that they do 
not much like even to mention their names. 
Hence they commonly call the pyramids after 
Philition, a shepherd who at that time fed his 
flocks about the place. 

129. After Chephren, Mycerinus (they said), 
son of Cheops, ascended the throne. This 
prince disapproved the conduct of his father, 
re-opened the temples, and allowed the people, 
who were ground down to the lowest point of 


misery, to return to their occupations, and to k 
resume the practice of sacrifice. His justice in I 
the decision of causes was beyond that of all R 
the former kings. The Egyptians praise him I 
in this respect more highly than any of their ,■ 
other monarchs, declaring that he not only I. 
gave his judgments with fairness, but also, K 
when any one was dissatisfied with his sen¬ 
tence, made compensation to him out of his 
own purse, and thus pacified his anger. Mycer¬ 
inus had established his character for mildness, 
and was acting as I have described, when the 
stroke of calamity fell on him. First of all his 
daughter died, the only child that he pos¬ 
sessed. Experiencing a bitter grief at this visi¬ 
tation, in his sorrow he conceived the wish to 
entomb his child in some unusual way. He 
therefore caused a cow to be made of wood, 
and after the interior had been hollowed out, 
he had the whole surface coated with gold; 
and in this novel tomb laid the dead body of 
his daughter. 

130. The cow was not placed under ground, 
but continued visible to my times: it was at 
Sa'is, in the royal palace, where it occupied a 
chamber richly adorned. Every day there are 
burnt before it aromatics of every kind; and 
all night long a lamp is kept burning in the 
apartment. In an adjoining chamber are stat¬ 
ues which the priests at Sa'is declared to repre¬ 
sent the various concubines of Mycerinus. 
They are colossal figures in wood, of the num¬ 
ber of about twenty, and are represented na¬ 
ked. Whose images they really are, I cannot say 
—I can only repeat the account which was 
given to me. 

131. Concerning these colossal figures and 
the sacred cow, there is also another tale nar¬ 
rated, which runs thus: “Mycerinus was en¬ 
amoured of his daughter, and offered her vio¬ 
lence—the damsel for grief hanged herself, and 
Mycerinus entombed her in the cow. Then her 
mother cut off the hands of all her tiring-maids, 
because they had sided with the father, and 
betrayed the child; and so the statues of the 
maids have no hands.” All this is mere fable in 
my judgment, especially what is said about the 
hands of the colossal statues. I could plainly 
see that the figures had only lost their hands 
through the effect of time. They had dropped 
off, and were still lying on the ground about 
the feet of the statues. 

132. As for the cow, the greater portion of it 
is hidden by a scarlet coverture; the head and 
neck, however, which are visible, are coated 
very thickly with gold, and between the horns 



126 - 136 ] THE HISTORY 77 


there is a representation in gold of the orb of 
the sun. The figure is not erect, but lying 
down, with the limbs under the body; the di¬ 
mensions being fully those of a large animal of 
the kind. Every year it is taken from the apart¬ 
ment where it is kept, and exposed to the light 
of day—this is done at the season when the 
Egyptians beat themselves in honour of one of 
their gods, whose name I am unwilling to 
mention in connection with such a matter.^ 
They say that the daughter of Mycerinus re¬ 
quested her father in her dying moments to al¬ 
low her once a year to see the sun. 

133. After the death of his daughter, My¬ 
cerinus was visited with a second calamity, of 
which I shall now proceed to give an account. 
An oracle reached him from the town of Buto, 
which said, “Six years only shalt thou live upon 
the earth, and in the seventh thou shalt end thy 
days.” Mycerinus, indignant, sent an angry 
message to the oracle, reproaching the god 
with his injustice—“My father and uncle,” he 
said, “though they shut up the temples, took 
no thought of the gods, and destroyed multi¬ 
tudes of men, nevertheless enjoyed a long life; 
I, who am pious, am to die so soon!” There 
came in reply a second message from the ora¬ 
cle—“For this very reason is thy life brought 
so quickly to a close—thou hast not done as it 
behoved thee. Egypt was fated to suffer afflic¬ 
tion one hundred and fifty years—the two 
kings who preceded thee upon the throne un¬ 
derstood this—thou hast not understood it.” 
Mycerinus, when this answer reached him, per¬ 
ceiving that his doom was fixed, had lamps pre¬ 
pared, which he lighted every day at eventime, 
and feasted and enjoyed himself unceasingly 
both day and night, moving about in the 
marsh-country and the woods, and visiting all 
the places that he heard were agreeable so¬ 
journs. His wish was to prove the oracle false, 
by turning the nights into days, and so living 
twelve years in the space of six. 

134. He too left a pyramid, but much in¬ 
ferior in size to his father’s. It is a square, each 
side of which falls short of three plethra by 
twenty feet, and is built for half its height of 
the stone of Ethiopia. Some of the Greeks call 
it the work of Rhodopis the courtesan, but they 
report falsely. It seems to me that these persons 
cannot have any real knowledge who Rhodopis 
was; otherwise they would scarcely have as¬ 
cribed to her a work on which uncounted treas¬ 
ures, so to speak, must have been expended. 
Rhodopis also lived during the reign of Ama- 

^ Osiris. 


sis, not of Mycerinus, and was thus very many 
years later than the time of the kings who built 
the pyramids. She was a Thracian by birth, and 
was the slave of ladmon, son of Hephaestopolis, 
a Samian, ^sop, the fable-writer, was one of 
her fellow-slaves. That ^sop belonged to lad¬ 
mon is proved by many facts—among others, 
by this. When the Delphians, in obedience to 
the command of the oracle, made proclamation 
that if any one claimed compensation for the 
murder of -^sop he should receive it, the per¬ 
son who at last came forward was ladmon, 
grandson of the former ladmon, and he re¬ 
ceived the compensation. .Tsop therefore must 
certainly have been the former ladmon’s slave. 

135. Rhodopis really arrived in Egypt under 
the conduct of Xantheus the Samian; she was 
brought there to exercise her trade, but was re¬ 
deemed for a vast sum by Charaxus, a Mytile- 
naean, the son of Scamandronymus, and broth¬ 
er of Sappho the poetess. After thus obtaining 
her freedom, she remained in Egypt, and, as 
she was very beautiful, amassed great wealth, 
for a person in her condition; not, however, 
enough to enable her to erect such a work as 
this pyramid. Any one who likes may go and 
see to what the tenth part of her wealth 
amounted, and he will thereby learn that her 
riches must not be imagined to have been very 
wonderfully great. Wishing to leave a memori¬ 
al of herself in Greece, she determined to have 
something made the like of which was not to 
be found in any temple, and to offer it at the 
shrine at Delphi. So she set apart a tenth of 
her possessions, and purchased with the money 
a quantity of iron spits, such as are fit for roast¬ 
ing oxen whole, whereof she made a present to 
the oracle. They are still to be seen there, lying 
of a heap, behind the altar which the Chians 
dedicated, opposite the sanctuary. Naucratis 
seems somehow to be the place where such 
women are most attractive. First there was this 
Rhodopis of whom we have been speaking, so 
celebrated a person that her name came to be 
familiar to all the Greeks; and, afterwards, 
there was another, called Archidice, notorious 
throughout Greece, though not so much 
talked of as her predecessor. Charaxus, after 
ransoming Rhodopis, returned to Mytilene, 
and was often lashed by Sappho in her poetry. 
But enough has been said on the subject of this 
courtesan. 

136. After Mycerinus, the priests said, Asy- 
chis ascended the throne. He built the eastern 
gateway of the temple of Vulcan, which in 
size and beauty far surpasses the other three. 


78 HERODOTUS [Book ii 


All the four gateways have figures graven on 
them, and a vast amount of architectural orna¬ 
ment, but the gateway of Asychis is by far the 
most richly adorned. In the reign of this king, 
money being scarce and commercial dealings 
straitened, a law was passed that the borrow¬ 
er might pledge his father’s body to raise the 
sum whereof he had need. A proviso was ap¬ 
pended to this law, giving the lender authority 
over the entire sepulchre of the borrower, so 
that a man who took up money under this 
pledge, if he died without paying the debt, 
could not obtain burial either in his own an¬ 
cestral tomb, or in any other, nor could he dur¬ 
ing his lifetime bury in his own tomb any 
member of his family. The same king, desirous 
of eclipsing all his predecessors upon the 
throne, left as a monument of his reign a pyra¬ 
mid of brick. It bears an inscription, cut in 
stone, which runs thus:—“Despise me not in 
comparison with the stone pyramids; for I sur¬ 
pass them all, as much as Jove surpasses the 
other gods. A pole was plunged into a lake, 
and the mud which clave thereto was gath¬ 
ered; and bricks were made of the mud, and 
so I was formed.” Such were the chief actions 
of this prince. 

137. He was succeeded on the throne, they 
said, by a blind man, a native of Anysis, whose 
own name also was Anysis. Under him Egypt 
was invaded by a vast army of Ethiopians, led 
by Sabacos, their king. The blind Anysis fled 
away to the marsh-country, and the Ethiopian 
was lord of the land for fifty years, during 
which his mode of rule was the following:— 
When an Egyptian was guilty of an ofience, his 
plan was not to punish him with death: in¬ 
stead of so doing, he sentenced him, according 
to the nature of his crime, to raise the ground 
to a greater or a less extent in the neighbour¬ 
hood of the city to which he belonged. Thus 
the cities came to be even more elevated than 
they were before. As early as the time of Sesos- 
tris, they had been raised by those who dug the 
canals in his reign; this second elevation of 
the soil under the Ethiopian king gave them a 
very lofty position. Among the many cities 
which thus attained to a great elevation, none 
(I think) was raised so much as the town 
called Bubastis, where there is a temple of the 
goddess Bubastis, which well deserves to be de¬ 
scribed. Other temples may be grander, and 
may have cost more in the building, but there 
is none so pleasant to the eye as this of Bubastis. 
The Bubastis of the Egyptians is the same as 
the Artemis (Diana) of the Greeks. 


138. The following is a description of this 
edifice:—Excepting the entrance, the whole 
forms an island. Two artificial channels from 
the Nile, one on either side of the temple, en¬ 
compass the building, leaving only a narrow 
passage by which it is approached. These chan¬ 
nels are each a hundred feet wide, and are 
thickly shaded with trees. The gateway is sixty 
feet in height, and is ornamented with figures 
cut upon the stone, six cubits high and well 
worthy of notice. The temple stands in the 
middle of the city, and is visible on all sides as 
one walks round it; for as the city has been 
raised up by embankment, while the temple 
has been left untouched in its original condi¬ 
tion, you look down upon it wheresoever you 
are. A low wall runs round the enclosure, hav¬ 
ing figures engraved upon it, and inside there 
is a grove of beautiful tall trees growing round 
the shrine, which contains the image of the 
goddess. The enclosure is a furlong in length, 
and the same in breadth. The entrance to it is 
by a road paved with stone for a distance of 
about three furlongs, which passes straight 
through the market-place with an easterly di¬ 
rection, and is about four hundred feet in 
width. Trees of an extraordinary height grow 
on each side the road, which conducts from the 
temple of Bubastis to that of Mercury. 

139. The Ethiopian finally quitted Egypt, 
the priests said, by a hasty flight under the fol¬ 
lowing circumstances. He saw in his sleep a 
vision:—a man stood by his side, and coun¬ 
selled him to gather together all the priests of 
Egypt and cut every one of them asunder. On 
this, according to the account which he himself 
gave, it came into his mind that the gods in¬ 
tended hereby to lead him to commit an act of 
sacrilege, which would be sure to draw down 
upon him some punishment either at the hands 
of gods or men. So he resolved not to do the 
deed suggested to him, but rather to retire from 
Egypt, as the time during which it was fated 
that he should hold the country had now (he 
thought) expired. For before he left Ethiopia 
he had been told by the oracles which are ven¬ 
erated there, that he was to reign fifty years 
over Egypt. The years were now fled, and the 
dream had come to trouble him; he therefore 
of his own accord withdrew from the land. 

140. As soon as Sabacos was gone, the blind 
king left the marshes, and resumed the gov¬ 
ernment. He had lived in the marsh-region the 
whole time, having formed for himself an is¬ 
land there by a mixture of earth and ashes. 
While he remained, the natives had orders to 




137 - 143 ] the history 79 


bring him food unbeknown to the Ethiopian, 
and latterly, at his request, each man had 
brought him, with the food, a certain quantity 
of ashes. Before Amyrtaeus, no one was able to 
discover the site of this island, which con¬ 
tinued unknown to the kings of Egypt who 
preceded him on the throne for the space of 
seven hundred years and more. The name 
which it bears is Elbo. It is about ten furlongs 
across in each direction. 

141. The next king, I was told, was a priest 
of Vulcan, called Sethos. This monarch de¬ 
spised and neglected the warrior class of the 
Egyptians, as though he did not need their 
services. Among other indignities which he 
offered them, he took from them the lands 
which they had possessed under all the prev¬ 
ious kings, consisting of twelve acres of choice 
land for each warrior. Afterwards, therefore, 
when Sanacharib, king of the Arabians^ and 
Assyrians, marched his vast army into Egypt, 
the warriors one and all refused to come to his 
aid. On this the monarch, greatly distressed, 
entered into the inner sanctuary, and, before 
the image of the god, bewailed the fate which 
impended over him. As he wept he fell asleep, 
and dreamed that the god came and stood at 
his side, bidding him be of good cheer, and go 
boldly forth to meet the Arabian host, which 
would do him no hurt, as he himself would 
send those who should help him. Sethos, then, 
relying on the dream, collected such of the 
Egyptians as were willing to follow him, who 
were none of them warriors, but traders, ar¬ 
tisans, and market people; and with these 
marched to Pelusium, which commands the 
entrance into Egypt, and there pitched his 
camp. As the two armies lay here opposite one 
another, there came in the night, a multitude 
of field-mice, which devoured all the quivers 
and bowstrings of the enemy, and ate the 
thongs by which they managed their shields. 
Next morning they commenced their fight, 
and great multitudes fell, as they had no arms 

^ It is curious to find Sennacherib called the 
: “king of the Arabians and Assyrians”—an order 
of words which seems even to regard him as 
rather an Arabian than an Assyrian king. In the 
same spirit his army is termed afterwards “the 
’ Arabian host.” It is impossible altogether to de¬ 
fend the view which Herodotus here discloses, 

I but we may understand how such a mistake was 
I possible, if we remember how Arabians were 
I mixed up with other races in Lower Mesopotamia 
j and what an extensive influence a great Assyrian 
king would exercise o\’er the tribes of the desert, 
especially those bordering on Mesopotamia. 


with which to defend themselves. There stands 
to this day in the temple of Vulcan, a stone 
statue of Sethos, with a mouse in his hand, and 
an inscription to this effect—“Look on me, and 
learn to reverence the gods.” 

142. Thus far I have spoken on the authority 
of the Egyptians and their priests. They de¬ 
clare that from their first king to this last- 
mentioned monarch, the priest of Vulcan, was 
a period of three hundred and forty-one genera¬ 
tions; such, at least, they say, was the number 
both of their kings, and of their high-priests, 
during this interval. Now three hundred gen¬ 
erations of men make ten thousand years, three 
generations filling up the century; and the re¬ 
maining forty-one generations make thirteen 
hundred and forty years. Thus the whole num¬ 
ber of years is eleven thousand, three hundred 
and forty; in which entire space, they said, no 
god had ever appeared in a human form; noth¬ 
ing of this kind had happened either under the 
former or under the later Egyptian kings. The 
sun, however, had within this period of time, 
on four several occasions, moved from his 
wonted course, twice rising where he now sets, 
and twice setting where he now rises. Egypt 
was in no degree affected by these changes; the 
productions of the land, and of the river, re¬ 
mained the same; nor was there anything un¬ 
usual either in the diseases or the deaths. 

143. When Hecataeus the historian was at 
Thebes, and, discoursing of his genealogy, 
traced his descent to a god in the person of his 
sixteenth ancestor, the priests of fupiter did to 
him exactly as they afterwards did to me, 
though I made no boast of my family. They led 
me into the inner sanctuary, which is a spacious 
chamber, and showed me a multitude of co¬ 
lossal statues, in wood, which they counted up, 
and found to amount to the exact number they 
had said; the custom being for every high- 
priest during his lifetime to set up his statue in 
the temple. As they showed me the figures and 
reckoned them up, they assured me that each 
was the son of the one preceding him; and this 
they repeated throughout the whole line, be¬ 
ginning with the representation of the priest 
last deceased, and continuing till they had com¬ 
pleted the series. When Hecata’us, in giving his 
genealogy, mentioned a god as his sixteenth 
ancestor, the priests opposed their genealogy 
to his, going through this list, and refusing to 
allow that any man was ever born of a god. 
Their colossal figures were each, they said, a 
Piromis, born of a Piromis, and the number of 
them was three hundred and forty-five; through 



80 HERODOTUS f Book ii 


the whole series Piromis followed Piromis, and 
the line did not run up either to a god or a 
hero. The word Piromis may be rendered “gen¬ 
tleman.” 

144. Of such a nature were, they said, the 
beings represented by these images—they were 
very far indeed from being gods. However, in 
the times anterior to them it was otherwise; 
then Egypt had gods for its rulers, who dwelt 
upon the earth with men, one being always 
supreme above the rest. The last of these was 
Horus, the son of Osiris, called by the Greeks 
Apollo. He deposed Typhon, and ruled over 
Egypt as its last god-king. Osiris is named Di¬ 
onysus (Bacchus) by the Greeks. 

145. The Greeks regard Hercules, Bacchus, 
and Pan as the youngest of the gods. With the 
Egyptians, contrariwise. Pan is exceedingly 
ancient, and belongs to those whom they call 
“the eight gods,” who existed before the rest. 
Hercules is one of the gods of the second order, 
who are known as “the twelve”; and Bacchus 
belongs to the gods of the third order, whom 
the twelve produced. I have already mentioned 
how many years intervened according to the 
Egyptians between the birth of Hercules and 
the reign of Amasis. From Pan to this period 
they count a still longer time; and even from 
Bacchus, who is the youngest of the three, they 
reckon fifteen thousand years to the reign of 
that king. In these matters they say they can¬ 
not be mistaken, as they have always kept 
count of the years, and noted them in their reg¬ 
isters. But from the present day to the time of 
Bacchus, the reputed son of Semele, daughter 
of Cadmus, is a period of not more than six¬ 
teen hundred years; to that of Hercules, son of 
Alcmena, is about nine hundred; while to the 
time of Pan, son of Penelope (Pan, according 
to the Greeks, was her child by Mercury), is 
a shorter space than to the Trojan war, eight 
hundred years or thereabouts. 

146. It is open to all to receive whichever he 
may prefer of these two traditions; my own 
opinion about them has been already declared. 
If indeed these gods had been publicly known, 
and had grown old in Greece, as was the case 
with Hercules, son of Amphitryon, Bacchus, 
son of Semele, and Pan, son of Penelope, it 
might have been said that the last-mentioned 
personages were men who bore the names of 
certain previously existing deities. But Bac¬ 
chus, according to the Greek tradition, was no 
sooner born than he was sewn up in Jupiter’s 
thigh, and carried off to Nysa, above Egypt, in 
Ethiopia; and as to Pan, they do not even pro¬ 


fess to know what happened to him after his 
birth. To me, therefore, it is quite manifest 
that the names of these gods became known to 
the Greeks after those of their other deities, 
and that they count their birth from the time 
when they first acquired a knowledge of them. 
Thus far my narrative rests on the accounts 
given by the Egyptians. 

147. In what follows I have the authority, 

not of the Egyptians only, but of others also 
who agree with them. I shall speak likewise in 
part from my own observation. When the 
Egyptians regained their liberty after the reign 
of the priest of Vulcan, unable to continue any 
while without a king, they divided Egypt into , 
twelve districts, and set twelve kings over 
them. These twelve kings, united together hy 
intermarriages, ruled Egypt in peace, having 
entered into engagements with one another 
not to depose any of their number, nor to aim 1 
at any aggrandisement of one above the rest, I 
but to dwell together in perfect amity. Now the 
reason why they made these stipulations, and ' ^ 
guarded with care against their infraction, was ’ 
because at the very first establishment of the 
twelve kingdoms an oracle had declared— | 
“That he among them who should pour in • 
Vulcan’s temple a libation from a cup of 1, 
bronze would become monarch of the whole 
land of Egypt.” Now the twelve held their > 
meetings at all the temples. | 

148. To bind themselves yet more closely to- 1 
gether, it seemed good to them to leave a com- 1 
mon monument. In pursuance of this resolu- ! 
tion they made the Labyrinth which lies a little 
above Lake Moeris, in the neighbourhood of 
the place called the city of Crocodiles. I visited I 
this place, and found it to surpass description; 
for if all the walls and other great works of the | 
Greeks could be put together in one, they 
would not equal, either for labour or expense, ! 
this Labyrinth; and yet the temple of Ephesus 
is a building worthy of note, and so is the tem¬ 
ple of Samos. The pyramids likewise surpass I 
description, and are severally equal to a num- I 
ber of the greatest works of the Greeks, but the 
Labyrinth surpasses the pyramids. It has twelve 
courts, all of them roofed, with gates exactly 
opposite one another, six looking to the north, ' 
and six to the south. A single wall surrounds 
the entire building. There are two different , 
sorts of chambers throughout—^half under 
ground, half above ground, the latter built 
upon the former; the whole number of these 1 
chambers is three thousand, fifteen hundred of 
each kind. The upper chambers I myself passed 1 





i44 'I5 i] the history 81 


through and saw, and what I say concerning 
them is from my own observation; of the un¬ 
derground chambers I can only speak from re¬ 
port: for the keepers of the building could not 
be got to show them, since they contained (as 
they said) the sepulchres of the kings who built 
the Labyrinth, and also those of the sacred 
crocodiles. Thus it is from hearsay only that I 
can speak of the lower chambers. The upper 
chambers, however, I saw with my own eyes, 
and found them to excel all other human pro¬ 
ductions; for the passages through the houses, 
and the varied windings of the paths across the 
courts excited in me infinite admiration as I 
passed from the courts into chambers, and from 
the chambers into colonnades, and from the 
colonnades into fresh houses, and again from 
these into courts unseen before. The roof was 
throughout of stone, like the walls; and the 
walls were carved all over with figures; every 
court was surrounded with a colonnade which 
was built of white stones exquisitely fitted to¬ 
gether. At the corner of the Labyrinth stands 
a pyramid, forty fathoms high, with large fig¬ 
ures engraved on it, which is entered by a 
subterranean passage. 

149. Wonderful as is the Labyrinth, the 
work called the Lake of Mceris, which is close 
by the Labyrinth, is yet more astonishing. The 
measure of its circumference is sixty schoenes, 
or three thousand six hundred furlongs, which 
is equal to the entire length of Egypt along the 
sea-coast. The lake stretches in its longest direc¬ 
tion from north to south, and in its deepest 
parts is of the depth of fifty fathoms. It is man¬ 
ifestly an artificial excavation, for nearly in the 
centre there stand two pyramids, rising to the 
height of fifty fathoms above the surface of the 
water, and extending as far beneath, crowned 
each of them with a colossal statue sitting upon 
a throne. Thus these pyramids are one hun¬ 
dred fathoms high, which is exactly a furlong 
(stadium) of six hundred feet: the fathom be¬ 
ing six feet in length, or four cubits, which is 
the same thing, since a cubit measures six, and 
a foot four, palms. The water of the lake does 
not come out of the ground, which is here ex¬ 
cessively dry, but is introduced by a canal from 
the Nile. The current sets for six months into 
the lake from the river, and for the next six 
months into the river from the lake. While it 
runs outward it returns a talent of silver daily 
to the royal treasury from the fish that are 
taken, but when the current is the other way 
the return sinks to one-third of that sum. 

150. The natives told me that there was a 


subterranean passage from this lake to the Lib¬ 
yan Syrtis, running westward into the interior 
by the hills above Memphis. As I could not 
anywhere see the earth which had been taken 
out when the excavation was made, and I was 
curious to know what had become of it, I asked 
the Egyptians who live closest to the lake 
where the earth had been put. The answer that 
they gave me I readily accepted as true, since I 
had heard of the same thing being done at 
Nineveh of the Assyrians. There, once upon a 
time, certain thieves, having formed a plan to 
get into their posse:ssion the vast treasures of 
Sardanapalus, the Ninevite king, which were 
laid up in subterranean treasuries, proceeded 
to tunnel a passage from the house where they 
lived into the royal palace, calculating the dis¬ 
tance and the direction. At nightfall they took 
the earth from the excavation and carried it to 
the river Tigris, which ran by Nineveh, con¬ 
tinuing to get rid of it in this manner until they 
had accomplished their purpose. It was exactly 
in the same way that the Egyptians disposed of 
the mould from their excavation, except that 
they did it by day and not by night; for as fast 
as the earth was dug, they carried it to the 
Nile, which they knew would disperse it far 
and wide. Such was the account which I re¬ 
ceived of the formation of this lake. 

151. The twelve kings for some time dealt 
honourably by one another, but at length it 
happened that on a certain occasion, when they 
had met to worship in the temple of Vulcan, 
the high-priest on the last day of the festival, 
in bringing forth the golden goblets from 
which they were wont to pour the libations, 
mistook the number and brought eleven gob¬ 
lets only for the twelve princes. Psammetichus 
was standing last, and, being left without a 
cup, he took his helmet, which was of bronze, 
from off his head, stretched it out to receive the 
liquor, and so made his libation. All the kings 
were accustomed to wear helmets, and all in¬ 
deed wore them at this very time. Nor was 
there any crafty design in the action of Psam¬ 
metichus. The eleven, however, when they 
came to consider what had been done, and be¬ 
thought them of the oracle which had declared 
“that he who, of the twelve, should pour a 
libation from a cup of bronze, the same would 
be king of the whole land of Egypt,’' doubted 
at first if they should not put Psammetichus to 
death. Finding, however, upwDn examination, 
that he had acted in the matter without any 
guilty intent, they did not think it would be 
just to kill him; but determined, instead, to 


82 HERODOTUS [Bookii 


strip him of the chief part of his power and to 
banish him to the marshes, forbidding him to 
leave them or to hold any communication with 
the rest of Egypt. 

152. This was the second time that Psam- 
metichus had been driven into banishment. On 
a former occasion he had fled from Sabacos 
the Ethiopian, who had put his father Needs 
to death; and had taken refuge in Syria from 
whence, after the retirement of the Ethiop in 
consequence of his dream, he was brought 
back by the Egyptians of the Saitic canton. 
Now it was his ill-fortune to be banished a sec¬ 
ond time by the eleven kings, on account of the 
libation which he had poured from his helmet; 
on this occasion he fled to the marshes. Feeling 
that he was an injured man, and designing to 
avenge himself upon his persecutors, Psam- 
metichus sent to the city of Buto, where there 
is an oracle of Latona, the most veracious of all 
the oracles of the Egyptians, and having in¬ 
quired concerning means of vengeance, re¬ 
ceived for answer that “Vengeance would 
come from the sea^ when brazen men should 
appear.” Great was his incredulity when this 
answer arrived, for never, he thought, would 
brazen men arrive to be his helpers. However, 
not long afterwards certain Carians and loni- 
ans, who had left their country on a voyage of 
plunder, were carried by stress of weather to 
Egypt where they disembarked, all equipped 
in their brazen armour, and were seen by the 
natives, one of whom carried the tidings to 
Psammetichus, and, as he had never before 
seen men clad in brass, he reported that brazen 
men had come from the sea and were plunder¬ 
ing the plain. Psammetichus, perceiving at 
once that the oracle was accomplished, made 
friendly advances to the strangers, and engaged 
them, by splendid promises, to enter into his 
service. He then, with their aid and that of the 
Egyptians who espoused his cause, attacked the 
eleven and vanquished them. 

153. When Psammetichus had thus become 
sole monarch of Egypt, he built the southern 
gateway of the temple of Vulcan in Memphis, 
and also a court for Apis, in which Apis is kept 
whenever he makes his appearance in Egypt. 
This court is opposite the gateway of Psam¬ 
metichus, and is surrounded with a colonnade 
and adorned with a multitude of figures. In¬ 
stead of pillars, the colonnade rests upon co¬ 
lossal statues, twelve cubits in height. The 
Greek name for Apis is Epaphus. 

154. To the lonians and Carians who had 
lent him their assistance Psammetichus as¬ 


signed as abodes two places opposite to each 
other, one on either side of the Nile, which re¬ 
ceived the name of “the Camps.” He also made 
good all the splendid promises by which he had 
gained their support; and further, he intrusted 
to their care certain Egyptian children whom 
they were to teach the language of the Greeks. 
These children, thus instructed, became the 
parents of the entire class of interpreters in 
Egypt. The lonians and Carians occupied for 
many years the places assigned them by Psam¬ 
metichus, which lay near the sea, a little below 
the city of Bubastis, on the Pelusiac mouth of 
the Nile. King Amasis long afterwards re¬ 
moved the Greeks hence, and settled them at 
Memphis to guard him against the native 
Egyptians. From the date of the original set¬ 
tlement of these persons in Egypt, we Greeks, 
through our intercourse with them, have ac¬ 
quired an accurate knowledge of the several 
events in Egyptian history, from the reign of 
Psammetichus downwards; but before his time 
no foreigners had ever taken up their residence 
in that land. The docks where their vessels 
were laid up and the ruins of their habita¬ 
tions were still to be seen in my day at the 
place where they dwelt originally, before they 
were removed by Amasis. Such was the mode 
by which Psammetichus became master of 
Egypt. 

155.1 have already made mention more than 
once of the Egyptian oracle, and, as it well de¬ 
serves notice, I shall now proceed to give an 
account of it more at length. It is a temple of 
Latona, situated in the midst of a great city on 
the Sebennytic mouth of the Nile, at some dis¬ 
tance up the river from the sea. The name of 
the city, as I have before observed, is Buto; and 
in it are two other temples also, one of Apollo 
and one of Diana. Latona’s temple, which con¬ 
tains the oracle, is a spacious building with a 
gateway ten fathoms in height. The most won¬ 
derful thing that was actually to be seen about 
this temple was a chapel in the enclosure made 
of a single stone, the length and height of 
which were the same, each wall being forty 
cubits square, and the whole a single block! 
Another block of stone formed the roof and 
projected at the eaves to the extent of four cu¬ 
bits. 

156. This, as I have said, was what aston¬ 
ished me the most, of all the things that were 
actually to be seen about the temple. The next 
greatest marvel was the island called Chem- 
mis. This island lies in the middle of a broad 
and deep lake close by the temple, and the 



152-160] THE HISTORY 83 


natives declare that it floats. For my own part 
I did not see it float, or even move; and I won¬ 
dered greatly, when they told me concerning 
it, whether there be really such a thing as a 
floating island. It has a grand temple of Apollo 
built upon it, in which are three distinct altars. 
Palm trees grow on it in great abundance, and 
many other trees, some of which bear fruit, 
while others are barren. The Egyptians tell the 
following story in connection with this island, 
to explain the way in which it first came to 
float:—“In former times, when the isle was 
still fixed and motionless, Latona, one of the 
eight gods of the first order, who dwelt in the 
city of Buto, where now she has her oracle, re¬ 
ceived Apollo as a sacred charge from Isis, and 
saved him by hiding him in what is now called 
the floating island. Typhon meanwhile was 
searching everywhere in hopes of finding the 
child of Osiris.’’ (According to the Egyptians, 
Apollo and Diana are the children of Bacchus 
and Isis, while Latona is their nurse and their 
preserver. They call Apollo, in their language, 
Horus; Ceres they call Isis; Diana, Bubastis. 
From this Egyptian tradition, and from no 
other, it must have been that ^Eschylus, the son 
of Euphorion, took the idea, which is found in 
none of the earlier poets, of making Diana the 
daughter of Ceres.) The island, therefore, in 
consequence of this event, was first made to 
float. Such at least is the account which the 
Egyptians give. 

157. Psammetichus ruled Egypt for fifty- 
four years, during twenty-nine of which he 
pressed the siege of Azotus without intermis¬ 
sion, till finally he took the place. Azotus is a 
great town in Syria. Of all the cities that we 
know, none ever stood so long a siege. 

158. Psammetichus left a son called Necos, 
who succeeded him upon the throne. This 
prince was the first to attempt the construction 
of the canal to the Red Sea—a work completed 
afterwards by Darius the Persian—the length 
of which is four days’ journey, and the width 
such as to admit of two triremes being rowed 
along it abreast. The water is derived from the 
Nile, which the canal leaves a little above the 
city of Bubastis, near Patumus, the Arabian 
town, being continued thence until it joins the 
Red Sea. At first it is carried along the Arabian 
side of the Egyptian plain, as far as the chain 
of hills opposite Memphis, whereby the plain 
is bounded, and in which lie the great stone 
quarries; here it skirts the base of the hills run¬ 
ning in a direction from west to east, after 
which it turns and enters a narrow pass, trend¬ 


ing southwards from this point until it enters 
the Arabian Gulf. From the northern sea to 
that which is called the southern or Erythraean, 
the shortest and quickest passage, which is 
from Mount Casius, the boundary between 
Egypt and Syria, to the Gulf of Arabia, is a dis¬ 
tance of exactly one thousand furlongs. But the 
way by the canal is very much longer on ac¬ 
count of the crookedness of its course. A hun¬ 
dred and twenty thousand of the Egyptians, 
employed upon the work in the reign of Necos, 
lost their lives in making the excavation. He at 
length desisted from his undertaking, in con¬ 
sequence of an oracle which warned him “that 
he was labouring for the barbarian.” The 
Egyptians call by the name of barbarians all 
such as speak a language difierent from their 
own. 

159. Necos, when he gave up the construc¬ 
tion of the canal, turned all his thoughts to war, 
and set to work to build a fleet of triremes, 
some intended for service in the northern sea, 
and some for the navigation of the Erythraean. 
These last were built in the Arabian Gulf 
where the dry docks in which they lay are still 
visible. These fleets he employed wherever he 
had occasion, while he also made war by land 
upon the Syrians and defeated them in a 
pitched battle at Magdolus, after which he 
made himself master of Cadytis, a large city of 
Syria. The dress which he wore on these occa¬ 
sions he sent to Branchidae in Milesia, as an 
offering to Apollo. After having reigned in 
all sixteen years, Necos died, and at his death 
bequeathed the throne to his son Psammis. 

160. In the reign of Psammis, ambassadors 
from Elis arrived in Egypt, boasting that their 
arrangements for the conduct of the Olympic 
Games were the best and fairest that could be 
devised, and fancying that not even the Egyp¬ 
tians, who surpassed all other nations in wis¬ 
dom, could add anything to their perfection. 
When these persons reached Egypt, and ex¬ 
plained the reason of their visit, the king sum¬ 
moned an assembly of all the wisest of the 
Egyptians. They met, and the Eleans having 
given them a full account of all their rules and 
regulations with respect to the contests said 
that they had come to Egypt for the express 
purpose of learning whether the Egyptians 
could improve the fairness of their regulations 
in any particular. The Egyptians considered 
awhile and then made inquiry, ‘ If they al¬ 
lowed their own citizens to enter the lists 
The Eleans answered, ‘‘That the lists were 
open to all Greeks, whether they belonged to 


84 HERODOTUS [Book ii 


Elis or to any other state.” Hereupon the 
Egyptians observed, “That if this were so, they 
departed from justice very widely, since it was 
impossible but that they would favour their 
own countrymen and deal unfairly by for¬ 
eigners. If therefore they really wished to man¬ 
age the games with fairness, and if this vvas the 
object of their coming to Egypt, they advised 
them to confine the contests to strangers, and 
allow no native of Elis to be a candidate.” Such 
was the advice which the Egyptians gave to the 
Eleans. 

161. Psammis reigned only six years. He 
attacked Ethiopia, and died almost directly 
afterwards. Apries, his son, succeeded him 
upon the throne, who, excepting Psammeti- 
chus, his great-grandfather, was the most pros¬ 
perous of all the kings that ever ruled over 
Egypt. The length of his reign was twenty-five 
years, and in the course of it he marched an 
army to attack Sidon, and fought a battle with 
the king of Tyre by sea. When at length the 
time came that was fated to bring him woe, an 
occasion arose which I shall describe more fully 
in my Libyan history, only touching it very 
briefly here. An army despatched by Apries to 
attack Cyrene, having met with a terrible re¬ 
verse, the Egyptians laid the blame on him, 
imagining that he had, of malice prepense, 
sent the troops into the jaws of destruction. 
They believed he had wished a vast number of 
them to be slain in order that he himself 
might reign with more security over the rest 
of the Egyptians. Indignant therefore at this 
usage, the soldiers who returned and the 
friends of the slain broke instantly into revolt. 

162. Apries, on learning these circumstances, 
sent Amasis to the rebels to appease the tumult 
by persuasion. Upon his arrival, as he was seek¬ 
ing to restrain the malcontents by his exhorta¬ 
tions, one of them, coming behind him, put a 
helmet on his head, saying, as he put it on, that 
he thereby crowned him king. Amasis was not 
altogether displeased at the action, as his con¬ 
duct soon made manifest; for no sooner had the 
insurgents agreed to make him actually their 
king than he prepared to march with them 
against Apries. That monarch, on tidings of 
these events reaching him, sent Patarbemis, 
one of his courtiers, a man of high rank, to 
Amasis with orders to bring him alive into 
his presence. Patarbemis, on arriving at the 
place where Amasis was, called on him to come 
back with him to the king, whereupon Amasis 
broke a coarse jest, and said, “Prythee take 
that back to thy master.” When the envoy, not¬ 


withstanding this reply, persisted in his re- - 
quest, exhorting Amasis to obey the summons 
of the king, he made answer “that this was ; 
exactly what he had long been intending to do; I 
Apries would have no reason to complain of p 
him on the score of delay; he would shortly ' 
come himself to the king, and bring others ' 
with him.” Patarbemis, upon this, compre¬ 
hending the intention of Amasis, partly from 
his replies and partly from the preparations ‘ 
which he saw in progress, departed hastily, 1 
wishing to inform the king with all speed of 
what was going on. Apries, however, when he 
saw him approaching without Amasis, fell | 
into a paroxysm of rage, and not giving him- , 
self time for reflection, commanded the nose 
and ears of Patarbemis to be cut off. Then the 
rest of the Egyptians, who had hitherto es- ' 
poused the cause of Apries, when they saw a 
man of such note among them so shamefully 
outraged, without a moment’s hesitation went i 
over to the rebels, and put themselves at the i| 
disposal of Amasis. 

163. Apries, informed of this new calamity, ^ 
armed his mercenaries, and led them against '' 
the Egyptians: this was a body of Carians and 1 
lonians, numbering thirty thousand men, 
which was now with him at Sai’s, where his ' 
palace stood—a vast building, well worthy of 
notice. The army of Apries marched out to 
attack the host of the Egyptians, while that of ! 
Amasis went forth to fight the strangers; and i 
now both armies drew near the city of Mo- ^ 
memphis and prepared for the coming fight. 

164. The Egyptians are divided into seven 'I 
distinct classes—these are, the priests, the war- | 
riors, the cowherds, the swineherds, the trades- > 
men, the interpreters, and the boatmen. Their 1 
titles indicate their occupations. The warriors 
consist of Hermotybians and Calasirians, who 
come from different cantons, the whole of 
Egypt being parcelled out into districts bearing ' 
this name. 

165. The following cantons furnish the 
Hermotybians:—The cantons of Busiris, Sai’s, 1 
Chemmis, Papremis, that of the island called 
Prosopitis, and half of Natho. They number, 
when most numerous, a hundred and sixty 
thousand. None of them ever practices a trade, 
but all are given wholly to war. 

166. The cantons of the Calasirians are dif¬ 
ferent—they include the following:—The can¬ 
tons of Thebes, Bubastis, Aphthis, Tanis, Men- 
des, Sebennytus, Athribis, Pharbaethus, Th- 
muis, Onuphis, Anysis, and Myecphoris—this 
last canton consists of an island which lies over 







161-172] THE HISTORY 85 


against the town of Bubastis. The Calasirians, 
when at their greatest number, have amount¬ 
ed to two hundred and fifty thousand. Like 
the Hermotybians, they are forbidden to pur¬ 
sue any trade, and devote themselves entirely 
to warlike exercises, the son following the 
father’s calling. 

167. Whether the Greeks borrowed from the 
Egyptians their notions about trade, like so 
many others, I cannot say for certain. I have 
remarked that the Thracians, the Scyths, the 
Persians, the Lydians, and almost all other bar¬ 
barians, hold the citizens who practice trades, 
and their children, in less repute than the rest, 
while they esteem as noble those who keep 
aloof from handicrafts, and especially honour 
such as are given wholly to war. These ideas 
prevail throughout the whole of Greece, par¬ 
ticularly among the Lacedemonians. Corinth 
is the place where mechanics are least despised. 

168. The warrior class in Egypt had certain 
special privileges in which none of the rest of 
the Egyptians participated, except the priests. 
In the first place each man had twelve arurce^ 
of land assigned him free from tax. (The arura 
is a square of a hundred Egyptian cubits, the 
Egyptian cubit being of the same length as the 
Samian.) All the warriors enjoyed this priv¬ 
ilege together, but there were other advantages 
which came to each in rotation, the same man 
never obtaining them twice. A thousand Cal¬ 
asirians, and the same number of Hermoty¬ 
bians, formed in alternate years the body-guard 
of the king; and during their year of service 
these persons, besides their arurce, received a 
daily portion of meat and drink, consisting of 
five pounds of baked bread, two pounds of 
beef, and four cups of wine. 

169. When Apries, at the head of his mer¬ 
cenaries, and Amasis, in command of the 
whole native force of the Egyptians, encount¬ 
ered one another near the city of Momemphis, 
an engagement presently took place. The for¬ 
eign troops fought bravely, but were over¬ 
powered by numbers, in which they fell very 
far short of their adversaries. It is said that Ap¬ 
ries believed that there was not a god who 
could cast him down from his eminence, so 
firmly did he think that he had established 
himself in his kingdom. But at this time the 
battle went against him, and his army being 
worsted, he fell into the enemy’s hands and 
was brought back a prisoner to Sai's, where he 
was lodged in what had been his own house, 

^ The arura was a little more than three-fourths 
of an English acre, and was only a land measure. 


but was now the palace of Amasis. Amasis 
treated him with kindness, and kept him in 
the palace for a while; but finding his conduct 
blamed by the Egyptians, who charged him 
with acting unjustly in preserving a man who 
had shown himself so bitter an enemy both to 
them and him, he gave Apries over into the 
hands of his former subjects, to deal with as 
they chose. Then the Egyptians took him and 
strangled him, but having so done they buried 
him in the sepulchre of his fathers. This tomb 
is in the temple of Minerva, very near the sanc¬ 
tuary, on the left hand as one enters. The Saites 
buried all the kings who belonged to their can¬ 
ton inside this temple; and thus it even con¬ 
tains the tomb of Amasis, as well as that of Ap¬ 
ries and his family. The latter is not so close to 
the sanctuary as the former, but still it is with¬ 
in the temple. It stands in the court, and is a 
spacious cloister built of stone and adorned 
with pillars carved so as to resemble palm trees, 
and with other sumptuous ornaments. Within 
the cloister is a chamber with folding doors, be¬ 
hind which lies the sepulchre of the king. 

170. Here too, in this same precinct of Mi¬ 
nerva at Sai's, is the burial-place of one whom 
I think it not right to mention in such a con¬ 
nection.^ It stands behind the temple, against 
the backwall, which it entirely covers. There 
are also some large stone obelisks in the en¬ 
closure, and there is a lake near them, adorned 
with an edging of stone. In form it is circular, 
and in size, as it seemed to me, about equal to 
the lake in Delos called “the Hoop.” 

171. On this lake it is that the Egyptians rep¬ 
resent by night his sufferings whose name I re¬ 
frain from mentioning, and this representation 
they call their Mysteries. I know well the whole 
course of the proceedings in these ceremonies, 
but they shall not pass my lips. So too, with re¬ 
gard to the mysteries of Ceres, which the 
Greeks term “the Thesmophoria,” I know 
them, but I shall not mention them, except so 
far as may be done without impiety. The 
daughters of Danaus brought these rites from 
Egypt, and taught them to the Pelasgic women 
of the Peloponnese. Afterwards, when the in¬ 
habitants of the peninsula were driven from 
their homes by the Dorians, the rites perished. 
Only in Arcadia, where the natives remained 
and were not compelled to migrate, their ob¬ 
servance continued. 

172. After Apries had been put to death in 
the way that I have described above, Amasis 
reigned over Egypt. He belonged to the can 

2 Osiris. 


86 HERODOTUS [Book ii 


ton of Sais, being a native of the town called 
Siouph. At first his subjects looked down on 
him and held him in small esteem, because he 
had been a mere private person, and of a house 
of no great distinction; but after a time Amasis 
succeeded in reconciling them to his rule, not 
by severity, but by cleverness. Among his other 
splendour he had a golden foot-pan, in which 
his guests and himself were wont upon occa¬ 
sion to wash their feet. This vessel he caused to 
be broken in pieces, and made of the gold an 
image of one of the gods, which he set up in 
the most public place in the whole city; upon 
which the Egyptians flocked to the image, and 
worshipped it with the utmost reverence. Ama¬ 
sis, finding this was so, called an assembly, and 
opened the matter to them, explaining how the 
image had been made of the foot-pan, wherein 
they had been wont formerly to wash their feet 
and to put all manner of filth, yet now it was 
greatly reverenced. “And truly,” he went on to 
say, “it had gone with him as with the foot- 
pan. If he was a private person formerly, yet 
now he had come to be their king. And so he 
bade them honour and reverence him.” Such 
was the mode in which he won over the Egyp¬ 
tians, and brought them to be content to do 
him service. 

173. The following was the general habit of 
his life:—from early dawn to the time when 
the forum is wont to fill, he sedulously trans¬ 
acted all the business that was brought before 
him; during the remainder of the day he drank 
and joked with his guests, passing the time in 
witty and, sometimes, scarce seemly conversa¬ 
tion. It grieved his friends that he should thus 
demean himself, and accordingly some of them 
chid him on the subject, saying to him—“Oh! 
king, thou dost but ill guard thy royal dignity 
whilst thou allowest thyself in such levities. 
Thou shouldest sit in state upon a stately 
throne, and busy thyself with affairs the whole 
day long. So would the Egyptians feel that a 
great man rules them, and thou wouldst be bet¬ 
ter spoken of. But now thou conductest thy¬ 
self in no kingly fashion.” Amasis answered 
them thus:—“Bowmen bend their bows when 
they wish to shoot; unbrace them when the 
shooting is over. Were they kept always strung 
they would break, and fail the archer in time 
of need. So it is with men. If they give them¬ 
selves constantly to serious work, and never in¬ 
dulge awhile in pastime or sport, they lose their 
senses, and become mad or moody. Know¬ 
ing this, I divide my life between pastime 
and business.” Thus he answered his friends. 


174. It is said that Amasis, even while he 
was a private man, had the same tastes for 
drinking and jesting, and was averse to engag¬ 
ing in any serious employment. He lived in 
constant feasts and revelries, and whenever his 
means failed him, he roamed about and robbed 
people. On such occasions the persons from 
whom he had stolen would bring him, if he 
denied the charge, before the nearest oracle; 
sometimes the oracle would pronounce him 
guilty of the theft, at other times it would ac¬ 
quit him. When afterwards he came to be 
king, he neglected the temples of such gods 
as had declared that he was not a thief, and 
neither contributed to their adornment nor 
frequented them for sacrifice, since he regard¬ 
ed them as utterly worthless and their oracles 
as wholly false: but the gods who had detected 
his guilt he considered to be true gods whose 
oracles did not deceive, and these he honoured 
exceedingly. 

175. First of all, therefore, he built the gate¬ 
way of the temple of Minerva at Sal's, which is 
an astonishing work, far surpassing all other 
buildings of the same kind both in extent and 
height, and built with stones of rare size and 
excellency. In the next place, he presented to 
the temple a number of large colossal statues 
and several prodigious andro-sphinxes, besides 
certain stones for the repairs, of a most extraor¬ 
dinary size. Some of these he got from the 
quarries over against Memphis, but the largest 
were brought from Elephantine, which is 
twenty days’ voyage from Sa'is. Of all these 
wonderful masses that which I most admire is 
a chamber made of a single stone, which was 
quarried at Elephantine. It took three years to 
convey this block from the quarry to Sa'is; and 
in the conveyance were employed no fewer 
than two thousand labourers, who were all 
from the class of boatmen. The length of this 
chamber on the outside is twenty-one cubits, its 
breadth fourteen cubits, and its height, eight. 
The measurements inside are the following:— 
the length, eighteen cubits and five-sixths; the 
breadth, twelve cubits; and the height, five. It 
lies near the entrance of the temple, where it 
was left in consequence of the following cir¬ 
cumstance:—it happened that the architect, 
just as the stone had reached the spot where it 
now stands, heaved a sigh, considering the 
length of time that the removal had taken, and 
feeling wearied with the heavy toil. The sigh 
was heard by Amasis who, regarding it as an 
omen, would not allow the chamber to be 
moved forward any farther. Some, however. 





i73-i8i] the history 87 


say that one of the workmen engaged at the 
levers was crushed and killed by the mass, and 
that this was the reason of its being left where 
it now stands. 

176. To the other temples of much note 
Amasis also made magnificent offerings—at 
Memphis, for instance, he gave the recumbent 
colossus in front of the temple of Vulcan, 
which is seventy-five feet long. Two other co¬ 
lossal statues stand on the same base, each 
twenty feet high, carved in the stone of Ethi¬ 
opia, one on either side of the temple. There 
is also a stone colossus of the same size at Sai’s, 
recumbent like that at Memphis. Amasis final¬ 
ly built the temple of Isis at Memphis, a vast 
structure, well worth seeing. 

177. It is said that the reign of Amasis was 
the most prosperous time that Egypt ever saw, 
—the river was more liberal to the land, and 
the land brought forth more abundantly for 
the service of man than had ever been known 
before; while the number of inhabited cities 
was not less than twenty thousand. It was this 
king Amasis who established the law that 
every Egyptian should appear once a year 
before the governor of his canton, and show 
his means of living; or, failing to do so, 
and to prove that he got an honest livelihood, 
should be put to death. Solon the Athenian 
borrowed this law from the Egyptians, and 
imposed it on his countrymen, who have ob¬ 
served it ever since. It is indeed an excellent 
custom. 

178. Amasis was partial to the Greeks, and 
among other favours which he granted them, 
gave to such as liked to settle in Egypt the city 
of Naucratis for their residence. To those who 
only wished to trade upon the coast, and did 
not want to fix their abode in the country, he 
granted certain lands where they might set up 
altars and erect temples to the gods. Of these 
temples the grandest and most famous, which 
is also the most frequented, is that called “the 
Hellenium.” It was built conjointly by the lo- 
nians, Dorians, and ^olians, the following 
cities taking part in the work:—the Ionian 
states of Chios, Teos, Phocaea, and Clazomenae; 
Rhodes, Cnidus, Halicarnassus, and Phaselis of 
the Dorians; and Mytilene of the iEolians. 
These are the states to whom the temple be¬ 
longs, and they have the right of appointing 
the governors of the factory; the other cities 
which claim a share in the building, claim 
what in no sense belongs to them. Three na¬ 
tions, however, consecrated for themselves sep¬ 
arate temples—the Eginetans one to Jupiter, 


the Samians to Juno, and the Milesians to 
Apollo. 

179. In ancient times there was no factory 
but Naucratis in the whole of Egypt; and if a 
person entered one of the other mouths of the 
Nile, he was obliged to swear that he had not 
come there of his own free will. Having so 
done, he was bound to sail in his ship to the 
Canobic mouth, or were that impossible ow¬ 
ing to contrary winds, he must take his wares 
by boat all round the Delta, and so bring them 
to Naucratis, which had an exclusive privilege. 

180. It happened in the reign of Amasis that 
the temple of Delphi had been accidentally 
burnt, and the Amphictyons had contracted to 
have it rebuilt for three hundred talents, of 
which sum one-fourth was to be furnished by 
the Delphians. Under these circumstances the 
Delphians went from city to city begging con¬ 
tributions, and among their other wanderings 
came to Egypt and asked for help. From few 
other places did they obtain so much—Amasis 
gave them a thousand talents of alum, and the 
Greek settlers twenty minse.^ 

181. A league was concluded by Amasis 
with the Cyrensans, by which Gyrene and 
Egypt became close friends and allies. He like¬ 
wise took a wife from that city, either as a sign 
of his friendly feeling, or because he had a 
fancy to marry a Greek woman. However this 
may be, certain it is that he espoused a lady of 
Gyrene, by name Ladice, daughter, some say, 
of Battus or Arcesilaiis, the king—others, of 
Gritobulus, one of the chief citizens. When the 
time came to complete the contract, Amasis 
was struck with weakness. Astonished hereat 
—for he was not wont to be so afflicted—the 
king thus addressed his bride: “Woman, thou 
hast certainly bewitched me—now therefore 
be sure thou shalt perish more miserably than 
ever woman perished yet.” Ladice protested 
her innocence, but in vain; Amasis was not 
softened. Hereupon she made a vow internal¬ 
ly, that if he recovered within the day (for no 
longer time was allowed her), she would pre¬ 
sent a statue to the temple of Venus at Gyrene. 
Immediately she obtained her wish, and the 
king’s weakness disappeared. Amasis loved 
her greatly ever after, and Ladice performed 
her vow. The statue which she caused to be 
made, and sent to Gyrene, continued there to 
my day, standing with its face looking out¬ 
wards from the city. Ladice herself, when Gam- 

^ Twenty min^e would be somewhat more than 
£80. The entire sum which the Delphians had to 
collect exceeded £18,000. 


HERODOTUS 


88 

byses conquered Egypt, suffered no wrong; 
for Cambyses, on learning of her who she was, 
sent her back unharmed to her country. 

182. Besides the marks of favour already 
mentioned, Amasis also enriched with offer¬ 
ings many of the Greek temples. He sent to 
Gyrene a statue of Minerva covered with plates 
of gold, and a painted likeness of himself. To 
the Minerva of Lindus he gave two statues in 
stone, and a linen corslet well worth inspec¬ 
tion. To the Samian Juno he presented two 
statues of himself, made in wood, which stood 


in the great temple to my day, behind the 
doors. Samos was honoured with these gifts on , 
account of the bond of friendship subsisting '1 
between Amasis and Polycrates, the son of 
iEaces: Lindus, for no such reason, but be¬ 
cause of the tradition that the daughters of . 
Danaus touched there in their flight from the ‘ 
sons of iEgyptus, and built the temple of 
Minerva. Such were the offerings of Amasis. 

He likewise took Cyprus, which no man had ' 
ever done before, and compelled it to pay him | 
a tribute. 



