The Eighth Book, Entitled 
URANIA 




I. The Greeks engaged in the sea-service were 
the following. The Athenians furnished a hun¬ 
dred and twenty-seven vessels to the fleet, 
which were manned in part by the Plataeans, 
who, though unskilled in such matters, were 
led by their active and daring spirit to under¬ 
take this duty; the Corinthians furnished a 
contingent of forty vessels; the Megarians sent 
twenty; the Chalcideans also manned twenty, 
which had been furnished to them by the 
Athenians; the Eginetans came with eighteen; 
the Sicyonians with twelve; the Lacedaemoni¬ 
ans with ten; the Epidaurians with eight; the 
Eretrians with seven; the Troezenians with 
five; the Styreans with two; and the Ceans 
with two triremes and two penteconters. Last 
of all, the Locrians of Opus came in aid with a 
squadron of seven penteconters. 

2. Such were the nations which furnished 
vessels to the fleet now at Artemisium; and in 
mentioning them I have given the number of 
ships furnished by each. The total number of 
the ships thus brought together, without count¬ 
ing the penteconters, was two hundred and 
seventy-one; and the captain, who had the 
chief command over the whole fleet, was Eury- 
biades the son of Eurycleides. He was fur¬ 
nished by Sparta, since the allies had said that 
“if a Lacedaemonian did not take the com¬ 
mand, they would break up the fleet, for never 
would they serve under the Athenians.” 

3. From the first, even earlier than the time 
when the embassy went to Sicily to solicit alli¬ 
ance, there had been a talk of intrusting the 
Athenians with the command at sea; but the 
allies were averse to the plan, wherefore the 
Athenians did not press it; for there was noth¬ 
ing they had so much at heart as the salvation 
of Greece, and they knew that, if they quar¬ 
relled among themselves about the command, 
Greece would be brought to ruin. Herein they 
judged rightly; for internal strife is a thing as 


much worse than war carried on by a united ) 
people, as war itself is worse than peace. The f 
Athenians therefore, being so persuaded, did | 
not push their claims, but waived them, so ' 
long as they were in such great need of aid 
from the other Greeks. And they afterwards 
showed their motive; for at the time when the | 
Persians had been driven from Greece, and 1 
were now threatened by the Greeks in their I 
own country, they took occasion of the inso- I 
lence of Pausanias to deprive the Lacedac I 
monians of their leadership. This, however, | 
happened afterwards. ! 

4. At the present time the Greeks, on their 
arrival at Artemisium, when they saw the ! 
number of the ships which lay at anchor near 
Apheta', and the abundance of troops every¬ 
where, feeling disappointed that matters had 
gone with the barbarians so far otherwise than 
they had expected, and full of alarm at what 
they saw, began to speak of drawing back 
from Artemisium towards the inner parts of 
their country. So when the Euboeans heard 
what was in debate, they went to Eurybiades, 
and besought him to wait a few days, while 
they removed their children and their slaves 
to a place of safety. But, as they found that 
they prevailed nothing, they left him and went 
to Themistocles, the Athenian commander, to 
whom they gave a bribe of thirty talents, on 1 
his promise that the fleet should remain and 
risk a battle in defence of Eubcea. 

5. And Themistocles succeeded in detaining 
the fleet in the way which I will now relate. 
He made over to Eurybiades five talents out of 
the thirty paid him, which he gave as if they 
came from himself; and having in this way 
gained over the admiral, he addressed himself 
to Adeimantus, the son of Ocytus, the Corin¬ 
thian leader, who was the only remonstrant 
now, and who still threatened to sail away 
from Artemisium and not wait for the other 





THE HISTORY 


captains. Addressing himself to this man. The- 
mistocles said with an oath—“Thou forsake 
us? By no means! I will pay thee better for re¬ 
maining than the Mede would for leaving thy 
friends’’—and straightway he sent on board 
the ship of Adeimantus a present of three tal¬ 
ents of silver. So these two captains were won 
by gifts, and came over to the views of Themis- 
tocles, who was thereby enabled to gratify the 
wishes of the Euboeans. He likewise made his 
own gain on the occasion; for he kept the rest 
of the money, and no one knew of it. The 
commanders who took the gifts thought that 
the sums were furnished by Athens, and had 
been sent to be used in this way. 

6. Thus it came to pass that the Greeks 
stayed at Eubma and there gave battle to the 
enemy. 

Now the battle was on this wise. The bar¬ 
barians reached Aphetae early in the afternoon, 
and then saw (as they had previously heard 
reported) that a fleet of Greek ships, weak in 
number, lay at Artemisium. At once they were 
eager to engage, fearing that the Greeks would 
fly, and hoping to capture them before they 
should get away. They did not however think 
it wise to make straight for the Greek station, 
lest the enemy should see them as they bore 
down, and betake themselves to flight immedi¬ 
ately; in which case night might close in l'>e- 
fore they came up with the fugitives, and so 
they might get clean oflf and make their escape 
from them; whereas the Persians were minded 
not to let a single soul slip through their hands. 

7. They therefore contrived a plan, which 
was the following:—They detached two hun¬ 
dred of their ships from the rest, and—to pre¬ 
vent the enemy from seeing them start—sent 
them round outside the island of Sciathos, to 
make the circuit of Euboea by Caphareus and 
Geraestus, and so to reach the Euripus. By this 
plan they thought to enclose the Greeks on 
every side; for the ships detached would block 
up the only way by which they could retreat, 
while the others would press upon them in 
front. With these designs therefore they dis¬ 
patched the two hundred ships, while they 
themselves waited—since they did not mean 
to attack the Greeks upon that day, or until 
they knew, by signal, of the arrival of the de¬ 
tachment which had been ordered to sail round 
Euboea. Meanwhile they made a muster of the 
other ships at Aphetae. 

8. Now the Persians had with them a man 
named Scyllias, a native of Scione, who was the 
most expert diver of his day. At the time of 


261 

the shipwreck off Mount Pelion he had recov¬ 
ered for the Persians a great part of what they 
lost; and at the same time he had taken care 
to obtain for himself a good share of the trea¬ 
sure. He had for some time been wishing to 
go over to the Greeks; but no good opportu¬ 
nity had offered till now, when the Persians 
were making the muster of their ships. In what 
way he contrived to reach the Greeks I am not 
able to say for certain; I marvel much if the 
tale that is commonlv told be true. ’Tis said he 
dived into the sea at Aphetx, and did not once 
come to the surface till he reached Artemisium, 
a distance of nearly eighty furlongs. Now 
many things are related of this man which are 
plainly false; but some of the stories seem to 
be true. My own opinion is that on this occa¬ 
sion he made the passage to Artemisium in a 
boat. 

However this might be, Scyllias no sooner 
reached Artemisium than he gave the Greek 
captains a full account of the damage done by 
the storm, and likewise told them of the ships 
sent to make the circuit of Eubcra. 

9. So the Greeks on receiving these tidings 
held a council, whereat, after much debate, it 
was resolved that they should stay quiet for 
the present where they were, and remain at 
their moorings, but that after midnight they 
should put out to sea, and encounter the ships 
which were on their way round the island. 
Later in the day, when they found that no one 
meddled with them, they formed a new plan, 
which was to wait till near evening, and then 
sail out against the main body of the barbari¬ 
ans, for the purpose of trying their mode of 
fight and skill in manoeuvring. 

10. When the Persian commanders and 
crews saw the Greeks thus boldly sailing to¬ 
wards them with their few ships, they thought 
them possessed with madness, and went out to 
meet them, expecting (as indeed seemed likely 
enough) that they would take all their vessels 
with the greatest ease. The Greek ships were 
so few, and their own so far outnumbered 
them, and sailed so much better, that they re¬ 
solved, seeing their advantage, to encompass 
their foe on every side. And now such of the 
lonians as wished well to the Grecian cause 
and served in the Persian fleet unwillingly, see¬ 
ing their countrymen surrounded, were sorely 
distressed; for they felt sure that not one of 
them would ever make his escape, so poor an 
opinion had they of the strength of the Greeks. 
On the other hand, such as saw with pleasure 
the attack on Greece, now vied eagerly with 


262 HERODOTUS [Book viii [ 


each other which should be the first to make 
prize of an Athenian ship, and thereby to se¬ 
cure himself a rich reward from the king. For 
through both the hosts none were so much ac¬ 
counted of as the Athenians. 

11. The Greeks, at a signal, brought the 
sterns of their ships together into a small com¬ 
pass, and turned their prows on every side to¬ 
wards the barbarians; after which, at a second 
signal, although inclosed within a narrow 
space, and closely pressed upon by the foe, yet 
they fell bravely to work, and captured thirty 
ships of the barbarians, at the same time tak¬ 
ing prisoner Philaon, the son of Chersis, and 
brother of Gorgus king of Salamis, a man of 
much repute in the fleet. The first who made 
prize of a ship of the enemy was Lycomedes 
the son of iTschreas, an Athenian, who was 
afterwards adjudged the meed of valour. Vic¬ 
tory however was still doubtful when night 
came on, and put a stop to the combat. The 
Greeks sailed back to Artemisium; and the 
barbarians returned to Aphetae, much sur¬ 
prised at the result, which was far other than 
they had looked for. In this battle only one of 
the Greeks who fought on the side of the king 
deserted and joined his countrymen. This was 
Antidorus of Lemnos, whom the Athenians re¬ 
warded for his desertion by the present of a 
piece of land in Salamis. 

12. Evening had barely closed in when a 
heavy rain—it was about midsummer—began 
to fall, which continued the whole night, with 
terrible thunderings and lightnings from 
Mount Pelion; the bodies of the slain and the 
broken pieces of the damaged ships were drift¬ 
ed in the direction of Aphetae, and floated 
about the prows of the vessels there, disturbing 
the action of the oars. The barbarians, hearing 
the storm, were greatly dismayed, expecting 
certainly to perish, as they had fallen into such 
a multitude of misfortunes. For before they 
were well recovered from the tempest and the 
wreck of their vessels ofi Mount Pelion, they 
had been surprised by a sea-fight which had 
taxed all their strength, and now the sea-fight 
was scarcely over when they were exposed to 
floods of rain, and the rush of swollen streams 
into the sea, and violent thunderings. 

13. If, however, they who lay at Aphetae 
passed a comfortless night, far worse were the 
sufferings of those who had been sent to make 
the circuit of Euboea; inasmuch as the storm 
fell on them out at sea, whereby the issue was 
indeed calamitous. They were sailing along 
near the Hollows of Euboea, when the wind 


began to rise and the rain to pour: overpow- 1 
ered by the force of the gale, and driven they [ 
knew not whither, at the last they fell upon ; 
rocks—Heaven so contriving, in order that ; 
the Persian fleet might not greatly exceed the 
Greek, but be brought nearly to its level. This J 
squadron, therefore, was entirely lost about i 
the Hollows of Euboea. 

14. The barbarians at Aphetse were glad j 
when day dawned, and remained in quiet at I 
their station, content if they might enjoy a lit- j 
tie peace after so many sufferings. Meanwhile ! 
there came to the aid of the Greeks a reinforce- | 
ment of fifty-three ships from Attica. Their 1 
arrival, and the news (which reached Artemi- I 
sium about the same time) of the complete 1 
destruction by the storm of the ships sent to \ 
sail round Euboea, greatly cheered the spirits I 
of the Greek sailors. So they waited again till | 
the same hour as the day before, and, once I 
more putting out to sea, attacked the enemy. 
This time they fell in with some Cilician ves¬ 
sels, which they sank; when night came on, 
they withdrew to Artemisium. 

15. The third day was now come, and the 
captains of the barbarians, ashamed that so 
small a number of ships should harass their 
fleet, and afraid of the anger of Xerxes, instead 
of waiting for the others to begin the battle, 
weighed anchor themselves, and advanced 
against the Greeks about the hour of noon, ! 
with shouts encouraging one another. Now it 
happened that these sea-fights took place on 
the very same days with the combats at Therm- ^ 
opylae; and as the aim of the struggle was in 
the one case to maintain the pass, so in the 
other it was to defend the Euripus. While the 
Greeks, therefore, exhorted one another not to 
let the barbarians burst in upon Greece, these 
latter shouted to their fellows to destroy the 
Grecian fleet,and get possession of the channel. 

16. And now the fleet of Xerxes advanced 
in good order to the attack, while the Greeks 
on their side remained quite motionless at 1 
Artemisium. The Persians therefore spread ► 
themselves, and came forward in a half-moon, > 
seeking to encircle the Greeks on all sides, and = 
thereby prevent them from escaping. The 
Greeks, when they saw this, sailed out to meet 
their assailants; and the battle forthwith began, t 
In this engagement the two fleets contended f 
with no clear advantage to either—for the 5 
armament of Xerxes injured itself by its own j 
greatness, the vessels falling into disorder, and ^ 
oft-times running foul of one another; yet still 
they did not give way, but made a stout fight. 




THE HISTORY 263 


since the crews felt it would indeed be a dis¬ 
grace to turn and fly from a fleet so inferior in 
number. The Greeks therefore suffered much, 
both in ships and men; but the barbarians ex¬ 
perienced a far larger loss of each. So the fleets 
separated after such a combat as I have de¬ 
scribed. 

17. On the side of Xerxes the Egyptians 
distinguished themselves above all the combat¬ 
ants; for besides performing many other noble 
deeds, they took five vessels from the Greeks 
with their crews on board. On the side of the 
Greeks the Athenians bore off the meed of 
valour; and among them the most distin¬ 
guished was Clinias, the son of Alcibiades, 
who served at his own charge with two hun¬ 
dred men, on board a vessel which he had 
himself furnished. 

18. The two fleets, on separating, hastened 
very gladly to their anchorage-grounds. The 
Greeks, indeed, when the battle was over, be¬ 
came masters of the bodies of the slain and the 
wrecks of the vessels; but they had been so 
roughly handled, especially the Athenians, one- 
half of whose vessels had suffered damage, 
that they determined to break up from their 
station, and withdraw to the inner parts of 
their country. 

19. Then Themistocles, who thought that 
if the Ionian and Carian ships could be de¬ 
tached from the barbarian fleet, the Greeks 
might be well able to defeat the rest, called the 
captains together. They met upon the sea¬ 
shore, where the Eubceans were now assemb¬ 
ling their flocks and herds; and here Themis¬ 
tocles told them he thought that he knew of a 
plan whereby he could detach from the king 
those who were of most worth among his 
allies. This was all that he disclosed to them of 
his plan at that time. Meanwhile, looking to 
the circumstances in which they were, he ad¬ 
vised them to slaughter as many of the Eu- 
boean cattle as they liked—for it was better (he 
said) that their own troops should enjoy them 
than the enemy—and to give orders to their 
men to kindle the fires as usual. With regard 
to the retreat, he said that he would take upon 
himself to watch the proper moment, and 
would manage matters so that they should re¬ 
turn to Greece without loss. These words 
pleased the captains; so they had the fires 
lighted, and began the slaughter of the cattle. 

20. The Eubceans, until now, had made 
light of the oracle of Bacis, as though it had 
been void of all significancy, and had neither 
removed their goods from the island, nor yet 


taken them into their strong places; as they 
would most certainly have done if they had 
believed that war was approaching. By this 
neglect they had brought their affairs into the 
very greatest danger. Now the oracle of which 
I speak ran as follows;— 

When o*er the main shall be thrown a byblus yo}{e 

by a stranger, 

Be thou ware, and drive from Euboea the goats^ 

loud-bleating. 

So, as the Eubceans had paid no regard to this 
oracle when the evils approached and im¬ 
pended, now that they had arrived, the worst 
was likely to befall them. 

21. While the Greeks were employed in the 
way described above, the scout who had been 
on the watch at Trachis arrived at Artemisium. 
For the Greeks had employed two watchers: 
—Polyas, a native of Anticyra, had been sta¬ 
tioned off Artemisium, with a row-boat at his 
command ready to sail at any moment, his 
orders being that, if an engagement took place 
by sea, he should convey the news at once to 
the Greeks at Thermopyls; and in like man¬ 
ner .\br6nychus, the son of Lysicles, an Athe¬ 
nian, had been stationed with a triaconter near 
Leonidas, to be ready, in case of disaster be¬ 
falling the land force, to carry tidings of it to 
Artemisium. It was this Abronychus who now 
arrived with news of what had befallen Leoni¬ 
das and those who were with him. When the 
Greeks heard the tidings they no longer de¬ 
layed to retreat, but withdrew in the order 
wherein they had been stationed, the Corinth¬ 
ians leading, and the Athenians sailing last 
of all. 

22. And now Themistocles chose out the 
swiftest sailers from among the Athenian ves¬ 
sels, and, proceeding to the various watering- 
places along the coast, cut inscriptions on the 
rocks, which were read by the lonians the day 
following, on their arrival at Artemisium. The 
inscriptions ran thus:—“Men of Ionia, ye do 
wrong to fight against your own fathers, and 
to give your help to enslave Greece. We be¬ 
seech you therefore to come over, if possible, to 
our side: if you cannot do this, then, we pray 
you, stand aloof from the contest yourselves, 
and persuade the Carians to do the like. If 
neither of these things be possible, and you 
are hindered, by a force too strong to resist, 
from venturing upon desertion, at least when 
we come to blows fight backwardly, remember¬ 
ing that you are sprung from us, and that it 
was through you we first provoked the hatred 
of the barbarian.” Themistocles, in putting up 


264 HERODOTUS [Book viii 


these inscriptions, looked, I believe, to two 
chances—either Xerxes would not discover 
them, in which case they might bring over the 
lonians to the side of the Greeks; or they 
would be reported to him and made a ground 
of accusation against the lonians, who would 
thereupon be distrusted, and would not be al¬ 
lowed to take part in the sea-fights. 

23. Shortly after the cutting of the inscrip¬ 
tions, a man of Histiaea went in a merchant- 
ship to Aphetae, and told the Persians that the 
Greeks had fled from Artemisium. Disbeliev¬ 
ing his report, the Persians kept the man a 
prisoner, while they sent some of their fastest 
vessels to see what had happened. These 
brought back word how matters stood; wher- 
upon at sunrise the whole fleet advanced to¬ 
gether in a body, and sailed to Artemisium, 
where they remained till mid-day; after which 
they went on to Histiaea. That city fell into 
their hands immediately; and they shortly 
overran the various villages upon the coast in 
the district of Hellopia, which was part of the 
Histiaean territory. 

24. It was while they were at this station 
that a herald reached them from Xerxes, 
whom he had sent after making the following 
dispositions with respect to the bodies of those 
who fell at Thermopylae. Of the twenty thou¬ 
sand who had been slain on the Persian side, 
he left one thousand upon the field while he 
buried the rest in trenches; and these he care¬ 
fully filled up with earth, and hid with foliage, 
that the sailors might not see any signs of 
them. The herald, on reaching Histiaea, caused 
the whole force to be collected together, and 
spake thus to them: 

“Comrades, King Xerxes gives permission 
to all who please, to quit their posts, and see 
how he fights with the senseless men who 
think to overthrow his armies.” 

25. No sooner had these words been uttered, 
than it became difficult to get a boat, so great 
was the number of those who desired to see 
the sight. Such as went crossed the strait, and 
passing among the heaps of dead, in this way 
viewed the spectacle. Many helots were in¬ 
cluded in the slain, but every one imagined 
that the bodies were all either Lacedaemonians 
or Thespians. However, no one was deceived 
by what Xerxes had done with his own dead. 
It was indeed most truly a laughable device— 
on the one side a thousand men were seen ly¬ 
ing about the field, on the other four thou¬ 
sand crowded together into one spot. This day 
then was given up to sight-seeing; on the next 


the seamen embarked on board their ships and 
sailed back to Histiaea, while Xerxes and his 
army proceeded upon their march. 

26. There came now a few deserters from 
Arcadia to join the Persians—poor men who 
had nothing to live on, and were in want of 
employment. The Persians brought them into 
the king’s presence, and there inquired of 
them, by a man who acted as their spokesman, 
“what the Greeks were doing.The Arcadians 
answered—“They are holding the Olympic 
Games, seeing the athletic sports and the char¬ 
iot-races.” “And what,” said the man, “is the 
prize for which they contend?” “An olive- 
wreath,” returned the others, “which is given 
to the man who wins.” On hearing this, Tri- 
tantaechmes, the son of Artabanus, uttered a 
speech which was in truth most noble, but 
which caused him to be taxed with cowardice 
by King Xerxes. Hearing the men say that 
the prize was not money but a wreath of olive, 
he could not forbear from exclaiming before 
them all: “Good heavens! Mardonius, what 
manner of men are these against whom thou 
hast brought us to fight?—men who contend 
with one another, not for money, but for 
honour!” 

27. A little before this, and just after the 
blow had been struck at Thermopylae, a her¬ 
ald was sent into Phocis by the Thessalians, 
who had always been on bad terms with the 
Phocians, and especially since their last over¬ 
throw. For it was not many years previous to 
this invasion of Greece by the king, that the 
Thessalians, with their allies, entered Phocis 
in full force, but were defeated by the Pho¬ 
cians in an engagement wherein they were 
very roughly handled. The Phocians, who had 
with them as soothsayer Tellias of Elis, were 
blocked up in the mountain of Parnassus, 
when the following stratagem was contrived 
for them by their Elean ally. He took six hun¬ 
dred of their bravest men, and whitened their 
bodies and their arms with chalk; then in¬ 
structing them to slay every one whom they 
should meet that was not whitened like them¬ 
selves, he made a night attack upon the Thes¬ 
salians. No sooner did the Thessalian sentries, i 
who were the first to see them, behold this 
strange sight, than, imagining it to be a prodi¬ 
gy, they were all filled with affright. From the 
sentries the alarm spread to the army, which 
was seized with such a panic that the Phoci¬ 
ans killed four thousand of them, and became [ 
masters of their dead bodies and shields. Of 
the shields one half were sent as an offering to 




23-34 1 THE HISTORY 265 


the temple at Abx, the other half were de¬ 
posited at Delphi; while from the tenth part 
of the booty gained in the battle, were made 
the gigantic figures which stand round the 
tripod in front of the Delphic shrine, and like¬ 
wise the figures of the same size and character 
at A bar. 

28. Besides this slaughter of the Thessalian 
foot when it was blockading them, the Phoci- 
ans had dealt a blow to their horse upon its in¬ 
vading their territory, from which they had 
never recovered. There is a pass near the city 
of Hyampolis, where the Phocians, having dug 
a broad trench, filled up the void with empty 
wine-jars, after which they covered the place 
with mould, so that the ground all looked 
alike, and then awaited the coming of the 
Thessalians. These, thinking to destroy the 
Phocians at one sweep, rushed rapidly for¬ 
ward, and became entangled in the wine-jars, 
which broke the legs of their horses. 

29. The Thessalians had therefore a double 
cause of quarrel with the Phocians, when they 
dispatched the herald above mentioned, who 
thus delivered his message:— 

“At length acknowledge, ye men of Phocis, 
that ye may not think to match with us. In 
times past, when it pleased us to hold with the 
Greeks, we had always the vantage over you; 
and now our influence is such with the bar¬ 
barian, that, if we choose it, you will lose your 
country, and (what is even worse) you will be 
sold as slaves. However, though we can now 
do with you exactly as we like, we are willing 
to forget our wrongs. Quit them with a pay¬ 
ment of fifty talents of silver, and we under¬ 
take to ward ofi the evils which threaten your 
country.” 

30. Such was the message which the Thes¬ 
salians sent. The Phocians were the only peo¬ 
ple in these parts who had not espoused the 
cause of the Medes; and it is my deliberate 
opinion that the motive which swayed them 
was none other—neither more nor less—than 
their hatred of the Thessalians: for had the 
Thessalians declared in favour of the Greeks, 
I believe that the men of Phocis would have 
joined the Median side. As it was, when the 
message arrived, the Phocians made answer, 
that “they would not pay anything—it was 
open to them, equally with the Thessalians, to 
make common cause with the Medes, if they 
only chose so to do—but they would never of 
their own free will become traitors to Greece.” 

31. On the return of this answer, the Thes¬ 
salians, full of wrath against the Phocians, 


ofTered themselves as guides to the barbarian 
army, and led them forth from Trachinia into 
Doris. In this place there is a narrow tongue 
of Dorian territory, not more than thirty fur¬ 
longs across, interposed between Malis and 
Phocis; it is the tract in ancient times called 
Dryopis; and the land, of which it is a part, is 
the mother-country of the Dorians in the Pelo- 
ponnese. This territory the barbarians did not 
plunder, for tbe inhabitants had espoused their 
side; and besides, the Thessalians wished that 
they should be spared. 

32. From Doris they marched forward into 
Phocis; but here the inhabitants did not fall 
into their power: for some of them had taken 
refuge in the high grounds of Parnassus—one 
summit of which, called Tithorea, standing 
quite by itself, not far from the city of Neon, 
is well fitted to give shelter to a large body of 
men, and had now received a number of the 
Phocians with their movables; while the great¬ 
er portion had fled to the country of the Ozoli- 
an Locrians, and placed their goods in the 
city called Amphissa, which lies above the 
Crissxan plain. The land of Phocis, however, 
was entirely overrun, for the Thessalians led 
the Persian army through the whole of it; and 
wherever they went, the country was wasted 
with fire and sword, the cities and even the 
temples being wilfully set alight by the troops. 

33. The march of the army lay along the 
valley of the Cephissus; and here they ravaged 
far and wide, burning the towns of Drymus, 
Charadra, Erochus, Tethronium, Amphicaea, 
Neon, Pedieis, Triteis, Elateia, Hyampolis, 
Parapotamii, and Abar. At the last-named 
place there was a temple of Apollo, very rich, 
and adorned with a vast number of treasures 
and offerings. There was likewise an oracle 
there in those days, as indeed there is at the 
present time. This temple the Persians plun¬ 
dered and burnt; and here they captured a 
number of the Phocians before they could 
reach the hills, and caused the death of some 
of their women by ill-usage. 

34. After passing Parapotamii, the barbari¬ 
ans marched to Panopeis; and now the army 
separated into two bodies, whereof one, which 
was the more numerous and the stronger of 
the two, marched, under Xerxes himself, to¬ 
wards Athens, entering Boeotia by the country 
of the Orchomenians. The Boeotians had one 
and all embraced the cause of the Medes; and 
their towns were in the possession of Mace¬ 
donian garrisons, whom Alexander had sent 
there, to make it manifest to Xerxes that the 


266 HERODOTUS [Book viii 


Boeotians were on the Median side. Such then 
was the road followed by one division of the 
barbarians. 

35. The other division took guides, and pro¬ 
ceeded towards the temple of Delphi, keeping 
Mount Parnassus on their right hand. They 
too laid waste such parts of Phocis as they 
passed through, burning the city of the Pan- 
opeans, together with those of the Daulians 
and of the yTolidae. This body had been de¬ 
tached from the rest of the army, and made to 
march in this direction, for the purpose of 
plundering the Delphian temple and convey¬ 
ing to King Xerxes the riches which were 
there laid up. For Xerxes, as I am informed, 
was better acquainted with what there was 
worthy of note at Delphi, than even with what 
he had left in his own house; so many of those 
about him were continually describing the 
treasures—more especially the offerings made 
by Croesus the son of Alyattes. 

36. Now when the Delphians heard what 
danger they were in, great fear fell on them. 
In their terror they consulted the oracle con¬ 
cerning the holy ti'easures, and inquired if they 
should bury them in the ground, or carry them 
away to some other country. The god, in reply, 
bade them leave the treasures untouched— 
“He was able,” he said, “without help to pro¬ 
tect his own.” So the Delphians, when they 
received this answer, began to think about sav¬ 
ing themselves. And first of all they sent their 
women and children across the gulf into 
Acha:a; after which the greater number of 
them climbed up into the tops of Parnassus, 
and placed their goods for safety in the Coryci- 
an cave; while some effected their escape to 
Amphissa in Locris. In this way all the Del¬ 
phians quitted the city, except sixty men, and 
the Prophet. 

37. When the barbarian assailants drew near 
and were in sight of the place, the Prophet, 
who was named Aceratus, beheld, in front of 
the temple, a portion of the sacred armour, 
which it was not lawful for any mortal hand 
to touch, lying upon the ground, removed 
from the inner shrine where it was wont to 
hang. Then went he and told the prodigy to 
the Delphians who had remained behind. 
Meanwhile the enemy pressed forward briskly, 
and had reached the shrine of Minerva Pro- 
naia, when they were overtaken by other prod¬ 
igies still more wonderful than the first. Truly 
it was marvel enough, when warlike harness 
was seen lying outside the temple, removed 
there by no power but its own; what followed. 


however, exceeded in strangeness all prodigies 
that had ever before been seen. The barbarians 
had Just reached in their advance the chapel 
of Minerva Pronaia, when a storm of thunder 
burst suddenly over their heads—at the same 
time two crags split off from Mount Parnassus, 
and rolled down upon them with a loud noise, 
crushing vast numbers beneath their weight— 
while from the temple of Minerva there went 
up the war-cry and the shout of victory. 

38. All these things together struck terror 
into the barbarians, who forthwith turned and 
fled. The Delphians, seeing this, came down 
from their hiding-places, and smote them with 
a great slaughter, from which such as escaped 
fled straight into BcEotia. These men, on their 
return, declared (as I am told) that besides 
the marvels mentioned above, they witnessed 
also other supernatural sights. Two armed 
warriors, they said, of a stature more than hu¬ 
man, pursued after their flying ranks, pressing 
them close and slaying them. 

39. These men, the Delphians maintain, 
were two Heroes belonging to the place—by 
name Phylacus and Autonoiis—each of whom 
has a sacred precinct near the temple; one, that 
of Phylacus, hard by the road which runs 
above the temple of Pronaia; the other, that 
of Autonoiis, near the Castalian spring, at the 
foot of the peak called Hyampeia. The blocks 
of stone which fell from Parnassus might still 
be seen in my day; they lay in the precinct of 
Pronaia, where they stopped, after rolling 
through the host of the barbarians. Thus was 
this body of men forced to retire from the tem¬ 
ple. 

40. Meanwhile, the Grecian fleet, which had 
left Artemisium, proceeded to Salamis, at the 
request of the Athenians, and there cast an¬ 
chor. The Athenians had begged them to take 
up this position, in order that they might con¬ 
vey their women and children out of Attica, 
and further might deliberate upon the course 
which it now behoved them to follow. Disap¬ 
pointed in the hopes which they had previous¬ 
ly entertained, they were about to hold a coun¬ 
cil concerning the present posture of their af¬ 
fairs. For they had looked to see the Pelopon¬ 
nesians drawn up in full force to resist the en¬ 
emy in Bceotia, but found nothing of what 
they had expected; nay, they learnt that the 
Greeks of those parts, only concerning them¬ 
selves about their own safety, were building a 
wall across the Isthmus, and intended to guard 
the Peloponnesc, and let the rest of Greece take 
its chance. These tidings caused them to make 



35-47 I 

the request whereof I spoke, that the combined 
fleet should anchor at Salamis. 

41. So while the rest of the fleet lay to ol! 
this island, the Athenians cast anchor along 
their own coast. Immediately upon their ar¬ 
rival, proclamation was made that every Athe¬ 
nian should save his children and household 
as he best could; whereupon some sent their 
families to Egina, some to Salamis, but the 
greater number to Troezen. This removal was 
made with all possible haste, partly from a de¬ 
sire to obey the advice of the oracle, but still 
more for another reason. The Athenians say 
that they have in their Acropolis a huge ser¬ 
pent, which lives in the temple, and is the 
guardian of the whole place. Nor do they only 
say this, but, as if the serpent really dwelt 
there, every month they lay out its food, which 
consists of a honey-cake. Up to this time the 
honey-cake had always been consumed; but 
now it remained untouched. So the priestess 
told the people what had happened; where¬ 
upon they left Athens the more readily, since 
they believed that the goddess had already 
abandoned the citadel. As soon as all was re¬ 
moved, the Athenians sailed back to their sta¬ 
tion. 

42. And now, the remainder of the Grecian 
sea-force, hearing that the fleet which had been 
at Artemisium, was come to Salamis, joined it 
at that island from Troezen—orders having 
been issued previously that the ships should 
muster at Pogon, the port of the Troezenians. 
The vessels collected were many more in num¬ 
ber than those which had fought at Artemisi¬ 
um, and were furnished by more cities. The 
admiral was the same who had commanded 
before, to wit, Eurybiades, the son of Eury- 
cleides, who was a Spartan, but not of the fam¬ 
ily of the kings: the city, however, which sent 
by far the greatest number of ships, and the 
best sailers, was Athens. 

43. Now these were the nations who com¬ 
posed the Grecian fleet. From the Peloponnese, 
the following—the Lacedaemonians with six¬ 
teen ships; the Corinthians with the same 
number as at Artemisium; the Sicyonians with 
fifteen; the Epidaurians with ten; the Treezen- 
ians with five; and the Hermionians with 
three. These were Dorians and Macedonians 
all of them (except those from Hermione), and 
had emigrated last from Erineus, Pindus, and 
Dryopis. The Hermionians were Dryopians, 
of the race which Hercules and the Malians 
drove out of the land now called Doris. Such 
were the Peloponnesian nations. 


267 

44. From the mainland of Greece beyond 
the Peloponnese, came the Athenians with a 
hundred and eighty ships, a greater number 
than that furnished by any other people; and 
these were now manned wholly by themselves; 
for the Platacans did not serve aboard the Athe¬ 
nian ships at Salamis, owing to the following 
reason. When the Greeks, on their withdrawal 
from Artemisium, arrived off Chalcis, the Pla- 
taeans disembarked upon the opposite shore of 
Boeotia, and set to work to remove their house¬ 
holds, whereby it happened that they were left 
behind. (The Athenians, when the region 
which is now called Greece was held by the 
Pelasgi, were Pelasgians, and bore the name of 
Cranaans; but under their king Cecrops, they 
were called Cecropidie; when Erechtheus got 
the sovereignty, they changed their name to 
Athenians; and when Ion, the son of Xuthus, 
became their general, they were named after 
him lonians.) 

45. The Megarians served with the same 
number of ships as at Artemisium; the Ambra- 
ciots came with seven; the Leucadians (who 
were Dorians from Corinth) with three. 

46. Of the islanders, the Eginetans fur¬ 
nished thirty ships—they had a larger num¬ 
ber equipped; but some were kept back to 
guard their own coasts, and only thirty, which 
however were their best sailers, took part in 
the fight at Salamis. (The Eginetans are Dori¬ 
ans from Epidaurus; their island was called 
formerly CEnone). The Chalcideans came next 
in order; they furnished the twenty ships with 
which they had served at Artemisium. The 
Eretrians likewise furnished their seven. These 
races are Ionian. Ceos gave its old number— 
the Ceans are lonians from Attica. Naxos fur¬ 
nished four: this detachment, like those from 
the other islands, had been sent by the citizens 
at home to join the Medes; but they made light 
of the orders given them, and joined the 
Greeks, at the instigation of Democritus, a 
citizen of good report, who was at that time 
captain of a trireme. The Naxians are lonians, 
of the Athenian stock. The Styreans served 
with the same ships as before; the Cythnians 
contributed one, and likewise a penteconter 
—these two nations are Dryopians: the Seriph- 
ians, Siphnians, and Melians, also served; they 
were the only islanders who had not given 
earth and water to the barbarian. 

47. All these nations dwelt inside the river 
Acheron and the country inhabited by the 
Thesprotians; for that people borders on the 
Ambraciots and Leucadians, who are the most 


THE HISTORY 



[ 

t 

268 HERODOTUS [Book viii i 


remote of all those by whom the fleet was fur¬ 
nished. From the countries beyond, there was 
only one people which gave help to the Greeks 
in their danger. This was the people of Cro- 
tona, who contributed a single ship, under the 
command of Pha}Hlus, a man who had thrice 
carried off the prize at the Pythian Games. The 
Crotoniats are, by descent, Achseans. 

48. Most of the allies came with triremes; 
but the Melians, Siphnians, and Seriphians, 
brought penteconters. The Melians, who draw 
their race from Lacedaemon, furnished tvv^o; 
the Siphnians and Seriphians, who are lonians 
of the Athenian stock, one each. The whole 
number of the ships, without counting the 
penteconters, was three hundred and seventy- 
eight. 

49. When the captains from these various 
nations were come together at Salamis, a coun¬ 
cil of war was summoned; and Eurybiades 
proposed that any one who liked to advise, 
should say which place seemed to him the fit¬ 
test, among those still in the possession of the 
Greeks, to be the scene of a naval combat. At¬ 
tica, he said, was not to be thought of now; 
but he desired their counsel as to the remain¬ 
der. The speakers mostly advised that the fleet 
should sail away to the Isthmus, and there give 
battle in defence of the Peloponnese; and they 
urged as a reason for this, that if they were 
worsted in a sea-fight at Salamis, they would 
be shut up in an island where they could get 
no help; but if they were beaten near the Isth¬ 
mus, they could escape to their homes. 

50. As the captains from the Peloponnese 
were thus advising, there came an Athenian to 
the camp, who brought word that the barbari¬ 
ans had entered Attica, and were ravaging and 
burning everything. For the division of the 
army under Xerxes was just arrived at Athens 
from its march through Bceotia, where it had 
burnt Thespiae and Plataea—both which cities 
were forsaken by their inhabitants, who had 
fled to the Peloponnese—and now it was lay¬ 
ing waste all the possessions of the Athenians. 
Thespiae and Plata^a had been burnt by the 
Persians, because they knew from the Thebans 
that neither of those cities had espoused their 
side. 

51. Since the passage of the Hellespont and 
the commencement of the march upon Greece, 
a space of four months had gone by; one, while 
the army made the crossing, and delayed about 
the region of the Hellespont; and three while 
they proceeded thence to Attica, which they 
entered in the archonship of Calliades. They 


found the city forsaken; a few people only re¬ 
mained in the temple, either keepers of the 
treasures, or men of the poorer sort. These per¬ 
sons having fortified the citadel with planks I 
and boards, held out against the enemy. It j 
was in some measure their poverty which had ^ 
prevented them from seeking shelter in Sala- | 
mis; but there was likewise another reason 
which in part induced them to remain. They 
imagined themselves to have discovered the 
true meaning of the oracle uttered by the 
Pythoness, which promised that “the wooden 
wall” should never be taken—the wooden 
wall, they thought, did not mean the ships, ■ 
but the place where they had taken refuge. 

52. The Persians encamped upon the hill 
over against the citadel, which is called Mars’ 
hill by the Athenians, and began the siege of ■ 
the place, attacking the Greeks with arrows 
whereto pieces of lighted tow were attached, 
which they shot at the barricade. And now • 
those who were within the citadel found them¬ 
selves in a most woeful case; for their wooden 
rampart betrayed them; still, however, they 
continued to resist. It was in vain that the Pisis- 
tratidae came to them and offered terms of sur¬ 
render—they stoutly refused all parley, and \ 
among their other modes of defence, rolled 
down huge masses of stone upon the barbari¬ 
ans as they were mounting up to the gates: so 
that Xerxes was for a long time very greatly 
perplexed, and could not contrive any way 
to take them. 

53. At last, however, in the midst of these 
many difficulties, the barbarians made discov¬ 
ery of an access. For verily the oracle had 
spoken truth; and it was fated that the whole 
mainland of Attica should fall beneath the sway 
of the Persians. Right in front of the citadel, i 
but behind the gates and the common ascent ! 
—where no watch was kept, and no one would 
have thought it possible that any foot of man 
could climb—a few soldiers mounted from the 
sanctuary of Aglaurus, Cecrops’ daughter, not¬ 
withstanding the steepness of the precipice. As 
soon as the Athenians saw them upon the sum- t 
mit, some threw themselves headlong from the i 
wall, and so perished; while others fled for j 
refuge to the inner part of the temple. The I 
Persians rushed to the gates and opened them, 11 
after which they massacred the suppliants. I 
When all were slain, they plundered the tern- I 
pie, and fired every part of the citadel. 

54. Xerxes, thus completely master of Ath¬ 
ens, despatched a horseman to Susa, with a j 
message to Artabanus, informing him of his 








48-60] THE HISTORY 269 


success hitherto. The day after, he collected 
together all the Athenian exiles who had come 
into Greece in his train, and bade them go up 
into the citadel, and there oiler sacrifice after 
' their own fashion. I know not whether he had 
' had a dream which made him give this order, 
or whether he felt some remorse on account of 
having set the temple on fire. However this 
may have been, the exiles were not slow to 
obey the command given them. 

55. I will now explain why I have made 
mention of this circumstance: there is a tem¬ 
ple of Erechtheus the Earth-born, as he is 
called, in this citadel, containing within it an 
olive-tree and a sea. The tale goes among the 
Athenians, that they were placed there as wit¬ 
nesses by Neptune and Minerva, when they 
had their contention about the country. Now 
this olive-tree had been burnt with the rest of 
the temple when the barbarians took the place. 
But when the Athenians, whom the king had 
commanded to ofTer sacrifice, went up into the 
temple for the purpose, they found a fresh 
shoot, as much as a cubit in length, thrown out 
from the old trunk. Such at least was the ac¬ 
count which these persons gave. 

56. Meanwhile, at Salamis, the Greeks no 
sooner heard what had befallen the Athenian 
citadel, than they fell into such alarm that 
some of the captains did not even wait for the 
council to come to a vote, but embarked hastily 
on board their vessels, and hoisted sail as 
though they would take to flight immediately. 
The rest, who stayed at the council board, 
came to a vote that the lleet should give battle 
at the Isthmus. Night now drew on; and the 
captains, dispersing from the meeting, pro¬ 
ceeded on board their respective ships. 

57. Themistocles, as he entered his own ves¬ 
sel, was met by Mnesiphilus, an Athenian, who 
asked him what the council had resolved to 
do. On learning that the resolve was to stand 
away for the Isthmus, and there give battle on 
behalf of the Peloponnese, Mnesiphilus ex¬ 
claimed:— 

“If these men sail away from Salamis, thou 
wilt have no fight at all for the one fatherland; 
for they will all scatter themselves to their own 
homes; and neither Eurybiades nor any one 
else will be able to hinder them, nor to stop 
the breaking up of the armament. Thus will 
Greece be brought to ruin through evil coun¬ 
sels. But haste thee now; and, if there be any 
possible way, seek to unsettle these resolves— 
mayhap thou mightest persuade Eurybiades 
to change his mind, and continue here.” 


58. The suggestion greatly pleased Themis- 
tocles; and without answering a word, he went 
straight to the vessel of Eurybiades. Arrived 
there, he let him know that he wanted to speak 
with him on a matter touching the public serv¬ 
ice. So Eurybiades bade him come on board, 
and say whatever he wished. Then Themis¬ 
tocles, seating himself at his side, went over 
all the arguments which he had heard from 
Mnesiphilus, pretending as if they were his 
own, and added to them many new ones be¬ 
sides; until at last he persuaded Eurybiades, by 
his importunity, to quit his ship and again col¬ 
lect the captains to council. 

59. As soon as they were come, and before 
Eurybiades had opened to them his purpose in 
assembling them together, Themistocles, as 
men are wont to do when they are very anx¬ 
ious, spoke much to divers of them; where¬ 
upon the Corinthian captain, Adeimantus, the 
son of Ocytus, observed—“Themistocles, at the 
Games they who start too soon are scourged.” 
“True,” rejoined the other in his excuse, “but 
they who wait too late are not crowned.” 

60. Thus he gave the Corinthian at this time 
a mild answer; and towards Eurybiades him¬ 
self he did not now use any of those arguments 
which he had urged before, or say aught of 
the allies betaking themselves to flight if once 
they broke up from Salamis; it would have 
been ungraceful for him, when the confeder¬ 
ates were present, to make accusation against 
any: but he had recourse to quite a new sort of 
reasoning, and addressed him as follows:— 

“With thee it rests, O Eurybiades! to save 
Greece, if thou wilt only hearken unto me, 
and give the enemy battle here, rather than 
yield to the advice of those among us, who 
would have the fleet withdrawn to the Isth¬ 
mus. Hear now, I beseech thee, and judge be¬ 
tween the two courses. At the Isthmus thou 
wdlt fight in an open sea, which is greatly to 
our disadvantage, since our ships are heavier 
and fewer in number than the enemy’s; and 
further, thou wilt in any case lose Salamis, 
Megara, and Egina, even if all the rest goes 
well with us. The land and sea force of the 
Persians will advance together; and thy re¬ 
treat-will but draw them towards the Pelopon¬ 
nese, and so bring all Greece into peril. If, on 
the other hand, thou doest as I advise, these are 
the advantages which thou wilt so secure: in 
the first place, as we shall fight in a narrow sea 
with few ships against many, if the war fol¬ 
lows the common course, we shall gain a great 
victory; for to fight in a narrow space is favour- 




270 HERODOTUS [Book viii \ 


able to us—in an open sea, to them. Again, 
Salamis will in this case he preserved, where 
we have placed our wives and children. Nay, 
that very point by which ye set most store, is 
secured as much by this course as by the other; 
for whether we fight here or at the Isthmus, 
we shall equally give battle in defence of the 
Peloponnese. Assuredly ye will not do wisely 
to draw the Persians upon that region. For if 
things turn out as I anticipate, and we beat 
them by sea, then we shall have kept your Isth¬ 
mus free from the barbarians, and they will 
have advanced no further than Attica, but 
from thence have fled back in disorder; and 
we shall, moreover, have saved Megara, Egina, 
and Salamis itself, where an oracle has said 
that we are to overcome our enemies. When 
men counsel reasonably, reasonable success en¬ 
sues; but when in their counsels they reject 
reason, God does not choose to follow the wan 
derings of human fancies.” 

6 1. When Themistocles had thus spoken, 
Adeimantus the Corinthian again attacked 
him, and bade him be silent, since he was a 
man without a city; at the same time he called 
on Eurybiades not to put the question at the 
instance of one who had no country, and 
urged that Themistocles should show of what 
state he was envoy, before he gave his voice 
with the rest. This reproach he made, because 
the city of Athens had been taken, and was in 
the hands of the barbarians. Hereupon Them¬ 
istocles spake many bitter things against Adei¬ 
mantus and the Corinthians generally; and 
for proof that he had a country, reminded the 
captains, that with two hundred ships at his 
command, all fully manned for battle, he had 
both city and territory as good as theirs; since 
there was no Grecian state which could resist 
his men if they were to make a descent. 

62. After this declaration, he turned to Eury¬ 
biades, and addressing him with still greater 
warmth and earnestness—“If thou wilt stay 
here,” he said, “and behave like a brave man, 
all will be well—if not, thou wilt bring Greece 
to ruin. For the whole fortune of the war de¬ 
pends on our ships. Be thou persuaded by my 
words. If not, we will take our families on 
board, and go, just as we are, to Siris, in Italy, 
which is ours from of old, and which the 
prophecies declare we are to colonise some day 
or other. You then, when you have lost allies 
like us, will hereafter call to mind what I have 
now said.” 

63. At these words of Themistocles, Eury¬ 
biades changed his determination; principally. 


as I believe, because he feared that if he with- ! 
drew the fleet to the Isthmus, the Athenians ; 
would sail away, and knew that without the * 
Athenians, the rest of their ships could be no i 
match for the fleet of the enemy. He there- . 
fore decided to remain, and give battle at Sala- j 
mis. ! 

64. And now, the different chiefs, notwith¬ 
standing their skirmish of words, on learning 
the decision of Eurybiades, at once made ready 
for the fight. Morning broke; and, just as the 
sun rose, the shock of an earthquake was felt 
both on shore and at sea: whereupon the 
Greeks resolved to approach the gods with 
prayer, and likewise to send and invite the ^Ea- 
cids to their aid. And this they did, with as 
much speed as they had resolved on it. Prayers 
were offered to all the gods; and Telamon and 
Ajax were invoked at once from Salamis, 
while a ship was sent to Egina to fetch /Eacus 
himself, and the other T^acids. 

65. The following is a tale which was told 
by Dicseus, the son of Theocydes, an Athenian, 
who was at this time an exile, and had gained 
a good report among the Medes. He declared 
that after the army of Xerxes had, in the ab¬ 
sence of the Athenians, wasted Attica, he 
chanced to be with Demaratus the Lacedae¬ 
monian in the Thriasian plain, and that while 
there, he saw a cloud of dust advancing from 
Eleusis, such as a host of thirty thousand men 
might raise. As he and his companion were 
wondering who the men, from whom the dust 
arose, could possibly be, a sound of voices 
reached his ear, and he thought that he recog¬ 
nised the mystic hymn to Bacchus. Now De¬ 
maratus was unacquainted with the rites of 
Eleusis, and so he inquired of Dica!us what the 
voices were saying. Dicaeus made answer—“O 
Demaratus! beyond a doubt some mighty ca¬ 
lamity is about to befall the king’s army! For 
it is manifest, inasmuch as Attica is deserted 
by its inhabitants, that the sound which we 
have heard is an unearthly one, and is now 
upon its way from Eleusis to aid the Athenians 
and their confederates. If it descends upon the 
Peloponnese, danger will threaten the king 
himself and his land army—if it moves to¬ 
wards the ships at Salamis, ’twill go hard but 
the king’s fleet there suffers destruction. Every 
year the Athenians celebrate this feast to the 
Mother and the Daughter; and all who wish, 
whether they be Athenians or any other 
Greeks, are initiated. The sound thou hearest 
is the Bacchic song, which is wont to be sung - 
at that festival.” “Hush now,” rejoined the 





THE HISTORY 


271 


61-69 ] 

Other; “and see thou tell no man of this matter. 
For if thy words be brought to the king’s ear, 
thou wilt assuredly lose thy head because of 
them; neither I nor any man living can then 
save thee. Hold thy peace therefore. The gods 
will see to the king’s army.” Thus Demaratus 
counselled him; and they looked, and saw the 
dust, from which the sound arose, become a 
cloud, and the cloud rise up into the air and 
sail away to Salamis, making for the station of 
the Grecian fleet. Then they knew that it was 
the fleet of Xerxes which would suffer destruc¬ 
tion. Such was the tale told by Dicreus the son 
of Theocydes; and he appealed for its truth to 
Demaratus and other eye-witnesses. 

66. The men belonging to the fleet of Xer¬ 
xes, after they had seen the Spartan dead at 
Thermopylae, and crossed the channel from 
Trachis to Histisa, waited there by the space 
of three days, and then sailing down through 
the Euripus, in three more came to Phalerum. 
In my judgment, the Persian forces both by 
land and sea when they invaded Attica were 
not less numerous than they had been on their 
arrival at Sepias and ThermopyLx. For against 
the Persian loss in the storm and at Thermopy¬ 
lae, and again in the sea-fights off Artemisium, 
I set the various nations which had since 
joined the king—as the Malians, the Dorians, 
the Locrians, and the Boeotians—each serving 
in full force in his army except the last, who 
did not number in their ranks either the Thes¬ 
pians or the Platxans; and together with these, 
the Carystians, the Andrians, the Tenians, and 
the other people of the islands, who all fought 
on this side except the five states already men¬ 
tioned. For as the Persians penetrated further 
into Greece, they were joined continually by 
fresh nations. 

67. Reinforced by the contingents of all 
these various states, except Paros, the barbari¬ 
ans reached Athens. As for the Parians, they 
tarried at Cythnus, waiting to see how the war 
would go. The rest of the sea forces came safe 
to Phalerum; where they were visited by Xer¬ 
xes, who had conceived a desire to go aboard 
and learn the wishes of the fleet. So he came 
and sate in a seat of honour; and the sovereigns 
of the nations, and the captains of the ships, 
were sent for, to appear before him, and as 
they arrived took their seats according to the 
rank assigned them by the king. In the first 
seat sate the king of Sidon; after him, the king 
of Tyre; then the rest in their order. When the 
whole had taken their places, one after another, 
and were set down in orderly array, Xerxes, 


to try them, sent Mardonius and questioned 
each, whether a sea-fight should be risked or 
no. 

68. Mardonius accordingly went round the 
entire assemblage, beginning with the Sidoni- 
an monarch, and asked this question; to which 
all gave the same answer, advising to engage 
the Greeks, except only Artemisia, who spake 
as follows (§1.)*— 

“Say to the king, Mardonius, that these are 
my words to him: I was not the least brave of 
those who fought at Eubcea, nor were my 
achievements there among the meanest; it is 
my right, therefore, O my lord, to tell thee 
plainly what I think to be most for thy advan¬ 
tage now. This then is my advice. Spare thy 
ships, and do not risk a battle; for these people 
are as much superior to thy people in seaman¬ 
ship, as men to women. What so great need is 
there for thee to incur hazard at sea.^ Art thou 
not master of Athens, for which thou didst un¬ 
dertake thy expedition.^ Is not Greece subject 
to thee.^ Not a soul now resists thy advance. 
They who once resisted, were handled even as 
they deserved. (§ 2.) Now learn how I expect 
that affairs will go with thy adversaries. If 
thou art not over-hasty to engage with them by 
sea, but wilt keep thy fleet near the land, then 
whether thou abides! as thou art, or marches! 
forward towards the Peloponnese, thou wilt 
easily accomplish all for which thou art come 
hither. The Greeks cannot hold out against 
thee very long; thou wilt soon part them asun¬ 
der, and scatter them to their several homes. 
In the island where they lie, I hear they have 
no food in store; nor is it likely, if thy land 
force begins its march towards the Pelopon¬ 
nese, that they will remain quietly where they 
are—at least such as come from that region. 
Of a surety they will not greatly trouble them¬ 
selves to give battle on behalf of the Athenians. 
(§ 3.) On the other hand, if thou art hasty to 
fight, I tremble lest the defeat of thy sea force 
bring harm likewise to thy land army. This, 
too, thou shouldst remember, O king; good 
masters are apt to have bad servants, and bad 
masters good ones. Now, as thou art the best 
of men, thy servants must needs be a sorry set. 
These Egyptians, Cyprians, Cilicians, and 
Pamphylians, who are counted in the number 
of thy subject-allies, of how little service are 
they to thee!” 

69. As Artemisia spake, they who wished 
her well were greatly troubled concerning her 
words, thinking that she would suffer some 
hurt at the king’s hands, because she exhorted 


272 HERODOTUS [Book viii 


him not to risk a battle; they, on the other 
hand, who disliked and envied her, favoured 
as she was by the king above all the rest of the 
allies, rejoiced at her declaration, expecting 
that her life would be the forfeit. But Xerxes, 
when the words of the several speakers were 
reported to him, was pleased beyond all others 
with the reply of Artemisia; and whereas, even 
before this, he had always esteemed her much, 
he now praised her more than ever. Neverthe¬ 
less, he gave orders that the advice of the great¬ 
er number should be followed; for he thought 
that at Eubcea the fleet had not done its best, 
because he himself was not there to see— 
whereas this time he resolved that he would 
be an eye-witness of the combat. 

70. Orders were now given to stand out to 
sea; and the ships proceeded towards Salamis, 
and took up the stations to which they were 
directed, without let or hindrance from the 
enemy. The day, however, was too far spent 
for them to begin the battle, since night al¬ 
ready approached: so they prepared to engage 
upon the morrow. The Greeks, meanwhile, 
were in great distress and alarm, more especial¬ 
ly those of the Peloponnese, who were troubled 
that they had been kept at Salamis to fight on 
behalf of the Athenian territory, and feared 
that, if they should suffer defeat, they would 
be pent up and besieged in an island, while 
their own country was left unprotected. 

71. The same night the land army of the 
barbarians began its march towards the Pelo¬ 
ponnese, where, however, all that was possible 
had been done to prevent the enemy from forc¬ 
ing an entrance by land. As soon as ever news 
reached the Peloponnese of the death of Le¬ 
onidas and his companions at Thermopylae, the 
inhabitants flocked together from the various 
cities, and encamped at the Isthmus, under the 
command of Cleombrotus, son of Anaxandri- 
das, and brother of Leonidas. Here their first 
care was to block up the Scironian Way; after 
which it was determined in council to build a 
wall across the Isthmus. As the number assem¬ 
bled amounted to many tens of thousands, and 
there was not one who did not give himself to 
the work, it was soon finished. Stones, bricks, 
timber, baskets filled full of sand, were used in 
the building; and not a moment was lost by 
those who gave their aid; for they laboured 
without ceasing either by night or day. 

72. Now the nations who gave their aid, 
and who had flocked in full force to the Isth¬ 
mus, were the following: the Lacedaemonians, 
all the tribes of the Arcadians, the Eleans, the 


Corinthians, the Sicyonians, the Epidaurians, 
the Phliasians, the Troezenians, and the Her- 
mionians. These all gave their aid, being great¬ 
ly alarmed at the danger which threatened 
Greece. But the other inhabitants of the Pel- : 
oponnese took no part in the matter; though 
the Olympic and Carneian festivals were now 
over. 

73. Seven nations inhabit the Peloponnese. 
Two of them are aboriginal, and still continue 
in the regions where they dwelt at the first— 
to wit, the Arcadians and the Cynurians. A 
third, that of the Achaeans, has never left the 
Peloponnese, but has been dislodged from its 
own proper country, and inhabits a district 
which once belonged to others. The remaining 
nations, four out of the seven, are all immi¬ 
grants—namely, the Dorians, the Titolians, the 
Dryopians, and the Lemnians. To the Dorians 
belong several very famous cities; to the Titoli- 
ans one only, that is, Elis; to the Dryopians, 
Hermione and that Asine which lies over 
against Cardamyle in Laconia; to the Lemni¬ 
ans, all the towns of the Paroreats. The aborig¬ 
inal Cynurians alone seem to be lonians; even 
they, however, have, in course of time, grown 
to be Dorians, under the government of the 
Argives, whose Orneats and vassals they were. 
All the cities of these seven nations, except 
those mentioned above, stood aloof from the 
war; and by so doing, if I may speak freely, 
they in fact took part with the Medes. 

74. So the Greeks at the Isthmus toiled un¬ 
ceasingly, as though in the greatest peril; since 
they never imagined that any great success 
would be gained by the fleet. The Greeks at 
Salamis, on the other hand, when they heard 
what the rest were about, felt greatly alarmed; 
but their fear was not so much for themselves 
as for the Peloponnese. At first they conversed 
together in low tones, each man with his fel¬ 
low, secretly, and marvelled at the folly shown 
by Eurybiades; but presently the smothered 
feeling broke out, and another assembly was 
held; whereat the old subjects provoked much 
talk from the speakers, one side maintaining 
that it was best to sail to the Peloponnese and 
risk battle for that, instead of abiding at Sala¬ 
mis and fighting for a land already taken by 
the enemy; while the other, which consisted 
of the Athenians, Eginetans, and Megarians, 
was urgent to remain and have the battle 
fought where they were. 

75. Then Themistocles, when he saw that 
the Peloponnesians would carry the vote 
against him, went out secretly from the coun- 







70-79 I 

cil, and, instructing a certain man what he 
should say, sent him on hoard a merchant ship 
to the fleet of the Medes. The man’s name was 
Sicinnus; he was one of Themistocles’ house¬ 
hold slaves, and acted as tutor to his sons; in 
after times, when the Thespians were admit¬ 
ting persons to citizenship, Themistocles made 
him a Thespian, and a rich man to boot. The 
ship brought Sicinnus to the Persian fleet, and 
there he delivered his message to the leaders 
in these words:— 

“The Athenian commander has sent me to 
you privily, without the knowledge of the oth¬ 
er Greeks. He is a well-wisher to the king’s 
cause, and would rather success should attend 
on you than on his countrymen; wherefore he 
bids me tell you that fear has seized the (Greeks 
and they are meditating a hasty flight. Now 
then it is open to you to achieve the best work 
that ever ye wrought, if only ye will hinder 
their escaping. They no longer agree among 
themselves, so that they will not now make any 
resistance—nay, ’tis likely ye may see a fight 
already begun between such as favour and 
such as oppose your cause.” The messenger, 
when he had thus expressed himself, departed 
and was seen no more. 

76. Then the captains, believing all that the 
messenger had said, proceeded to land a large 
body of Persian troops on the islet of Psyttaleia, 
which lies between Salamis and the mainland; 
after which, about the hour of midnight, they 
advanced their western wing towards Salamis, 
so as to inclose the Greeks. At the same time 
the force stationed about Ceos and Cynosura 
moved forward, and filled the whole strait as 
far as Munychia with their ships. This advance 
was made to prevent the Greeks from escaping 
by flight, and to block them up in Salamis, 
where it was thought that vengeance might be 
taken upon them for the battles fought near 
Artemisium. The Persian troops were landed 
on the islet of Psyttaleia, because, as soon as 
the battle began, the men and wrecks were 
likely to be drifted thither, as the isle lay in 
the very path of the coming fight—and they 
would thus be able to save their own men and 
destroy those of the enemy. All these move¬ 
ments were made in silence, that the Greeks 
might have no knowledge of them; and they 
occupied the whole night, so that the men had 
no time to get their sleep. 

77. I cannot say that there is no truth in 
prophecies, or feel inclined to call in question 
those which speak with clearness, when I think 
of the following:— 


273 

IVArn they shall bridge with their ships to the 
sacred strand of Diana 

Girt with the golden falchion, and el{e to marine 
Cynosura, 

Mad hope swelling their hearts at the downfall of 
beautiful Athens 

Then shall godlike Right extinguish haughty Pre¬ 
sumption, 

InsulPs furious offspring, who thinketh to over¬ 
throw all things. 

Brass with brass shall mingle, and Mars with 
blood shall empurple 

OceatPs waves. Then—then shall the day of 
Grecians freedom 

Come from Victory fair, and SatunPs son all-see¬ 
ing. 

When I look to this, and perceive how clearly 
Bacis spoke, I neither venture myself to say 
anything against prophecies, nor do I approve 
of others impugning them. 

78. Meanwhile, among the captains at Sala¬ 
mis, the strife of words grew fierce. As yet they 
did not know that they were encompassed, but 
imagined that the barbarians remained in the 
same places where they had seen them the day 
before. 

79. In the midst of their contention, Aris¬ 
tides, the son of Lysimachus, who had crossed 
from Egina, arrived in Salamis. He was an 
Athenian, and had been ostracised by the com¬ 
monalty; yet I believe, from what I have heard 
concerning his character, that there was not in 
all Athens a man so worthy or so just as he. 
He now came to the council, and, standing 
outside, called for Themistocles. Now Themis¬ 
tocles was not his friend, but his most deter¬ 
mined enemy. However, under the pressure of 
the great dangers impending, Aristides forgot 
their feud, and called Themistocles out of the 
council, since he wished to confer with him. 
He had heard before his arrival of the impa¬ 
tience of the Peloponnesians to withdraw the 
fleet to the Isthmus. As soon therefore as 
Themistocles came forth, Aristides addressed 
him in these words:— 

“Our rivalry at all times, and especially at 
the present season, ought to be a struggle, 
which of us shall most advantage our country. 
Let me then say to thee, that so far as regards 
the departure of the Peloponnesians from this 
place, much talk and little will be found pre¬ 
cisely alike. I have seen with my own eyes that 
which I now report: that, however much the 
Corinthians or Eurybiades himself may wish 
it, they cannot now retreat; for we are enclosed 
on every side by the enemy. Go in to them, and 
make this known.” 


THE HISTORY 


274 HERODOTUS [Book viii 


8 0. “Thy advice is excellent,” answered the 
other; “and thy tidings are also good. That 
which I earnestly desired to happen, thine eyes 
have beheld accomplished. Know that what 
the Medes have now done was at my instance; 
for it was necessary, as our men would not 
fight here of their own free will, to make them 
fight whether they would or no. But come 
now, as thou hast brought the good news, go 
in and tell it. For if I speak to them, they will 
think it a feigned tale, and will not believe that 
the barbarians have inclosed us around. There¬ 
fore do thou go to them, and inform them how 
matters stand. If they believe thee, ’twill be for 
the best; but if otherwise, it will not harm. 
For it is impossible that they should now flee 
away, if we are indeed shut in on all sides, as 
thou sayest.” 

8 1. Then Aristides entered the assembly, 
and spoke to the captains: he had come, he told 
them, from Egina, and had but barely escaped 
the blockading vessels—the Greek fleet was en¬ 
tirely inclosed by the ships of Xerxes—and he 
advised them to get themselves in readiness to 
resist the foe. Having said so much, he with¬ 
drew. And now another contest arose; for the 
greater part of the captains would not believe 
the tidings. 

82. But while they still doubted, a Tenian 
trireme, commanded by Panaetius the son of 
Sosimenes, deserted from the Persians and 
joined the Greeks, bringing full intelligence. 
For this reason the Tenians were inscribed 
upon the tripod at Delphi among those who 
overthrew the barbarians. With this ship, 
which deserted to their side at Salamis, and 
the Lemnian vessel which came over before at 
Artemisium, the Greek fleet was brought to 
the full number of 380 ships; otherwise it fell 
short by two of that amount. 

83. The Greeks now, not doubting what the 
Tenians told them, made ready for the coming 
fight. At the dawn of day, all the men-at-arms 
were assembled together, and speeches were 
made to them, of which the best was that of 
Themistocles; who throughout contrasted 
what was noble with what was base, and bade 
them, in all that came within the range of 
man’s nature and constitution, always to make 
choice of the nobler part. Having thus wound 
up his discourse, he told them to go at once on 
board their ships, which they accordingly did; 
and about his time the trireme, that had been 
sent to Egina for the .^acidae, returned; where¬ 
upon the Greeks put to sea with all their fleet. 

84. The fleet had scarce left the land when 


they were attacked by the barbarians. At once 
most of the Greeks began to back water, and 
were about touching the shore, when Ameinias 
of Pallene, one of the Athenian captains, dart¬ 
ed forth in front of the line, and charged a ship 
of the enemy. The two vessels became entan¬ 
gled, and could not separate, whereupon the 
rest of the fleet came up to help Ameinias, and 
engaged with the Persians. Such is the account 
which the Athenians give of the way in which 
the battle began; but the Eginetans maintain 
that the vessel which had been to Egina for 
the ^acidae, was the one that brought on the 
fight. It is also reported, that a phantom in the 
form of a woman appeared to the Greeks, and, 
in a voice that was heard from end to end of 
the fleet, cheered them on to the fight; first, 
however, rebuking them, and saying— 
“Strange men, how long are ye going to back 
water 

85. Against the Athenians, who held the 
western extremity of the line towards Eleusis, 
were placed the Phoenicians; against the Lace¬ 
daemonians, whose station was eastward to¬ 
wards the Piraeus, the lonians. Of these last a 
few only followed the advice of Themistocles, 
to fight backwardly; the greater number did 
far otherwise. I could mention here the names 
of many trierarchs who took vessels from the 
Greeks, but I shall pass over all excepting The- 
omestor, the son of Androdamas, and Phyla- 
cus, the son of Histiaeus, both Samians. I show 
this preference to them, inasmuch as for this 
service Theomestor was made tyrant of Samos 
by the Persians, which Phylacus was enrolled 
among the king’s benefactors, and presented 
with a large estate in land. In the Persian 
tongue the king’s benefactors are called Oro- 
sangs. 

86 . Far the greater number of the Persian 
ships engaged in this battle were disabled, 
either by the Athenians or by the Eginetans. 
For as the Greeks fought in order and kept 
their line, while the barbarians were in con¬ 
fusion and had no plan in anything that they 
did, the issue of the battle could scarce be other 
than it was. Yet the Persians fought far more 
bravely here than at Euboea, and indeed sur¬ 
passed themselves; each did his utmost 
through fear of Xerxes, for each thought that 
the king’s eye was upon himself. 

87. What part the several nations, whether 
Greek or barbarian, took in the combat, I am 
not able to say for certain; Artemisia, however, 
I know, distinguished herself in such a way as 
raised her even higher than she stood before 


So-9i 1 THE HISTORY 275 


in the esteem of the king. For after confusion 
had spread throughout the whole of the king’s 
fleet, and her ship was closely pursued by an 
Athenian trireme, she, having no way to fly, 
since in front of her were a number of friend¬ 
ly vessels, and she was nearest of all the Per¬ 
sians to the enemy, resolved on a measure 
which in fact proved her safety. Pressed by the 
Athenian pursuer, she bore straight against 
one of the ships of her own party, a Calyndian, 
which had Damasithymus, the Calyndian 
king, himself on board. I cannot say whether 
she had had any quarrel with the man while 
the fleet was at the Hellespont, or no—neither 
can I decide whether she of set purpose at¬ 
tacked his vessel, or whether it merely chanced 
that the Calyndian ship came in her way—but 
certain it is that she bore down upon his ves¬ 
sel and sank it, and that thereby she had the 
good fortune to procure herself a double ad¬ 
vantage. For the commander of the Athenian 
trireme, when he saw her bear down on one 
of the enemy’s fleet, thought immediately that 
her vessel was a Greek, or else had deserted 
from the Persians, and was now fighting on 
the Greek side; he therefore gave up the chase, 
and turned away to attack others. 

88. Thus in the first place she saved her life 
by the action, and was enabled to get clear off 
from the battle; while further, it fell out that 
in the very act of doing the king an injury she 
raised herself to a greater height than ever in 
his esteem. For as Xerxes beheld the fight, he 
remarked (it is said) the destruction of the 
vessel, whereupon the bystanders observed to 
him—“Seest thou, master, how well Artemis¬ 
ia fights, and how she has just sunk a ship of 
the enemy.?” Then Xerxes asked if it were 
really Artemisia’s doing; and they answered, 
“Certainly; for they knew her ensign”; while 
all made sure that the sunken vessel belonged 
to the opposite side. Everything, it is said, con¬ 
spired to prosper the queen—it was especially 
fortunate for her that not one of those on board 
the Calyndian ship survived to become her ac¬ 
cuser. Xerxes, they say, in reply to the remarks 
made to him, observed—“My men have be¬ 
haved like women, my women like men!” 

89. There fell in this combat Ariabignes, 
one of the chief commanders of the fleet, who 
was son of Darius and brother of Xerxes; and 
with him perished a vast number of men of 
high repute, Persians, Medes, and allies. Of 
the Greeks there died only a few; for, as they 
were able to swim, all those that were not slain 
outright by the enemy escaped from the sink¬ 


ing vessels and swam across to Salamis. But 
on the side of the barbarians more perished 
by drowning than in any other way, since they 
did not know how to swim. The great destruc¬ 
tion took place when the ships which had been 
first engaged began to fly; for they who were 
stationed in the rear, anxious to display their 
valour before the eyes of the king, made every 
efTort to force their way to the front, and thus 
became entangled with such of their own ves¬ 
sels as were retreating. 

90. In this confusion the following event oc¬ 
curred: certain Phoenicians belonging to the 
ships which had thus perished made their ap¬ 
pearance before the king, and laid the blame 
of their loss on the lonians, declaring that they 
were traitors, and had wilfully destroyed the 
vessels. But the upshot of this complaint was 
that the Ionian captains escaped the death 
which threatened them, while their Phoenician 
accusers received death as their reward. For it 
happened that, exactly as they spoke, a Sa- 
mothracian vessel bore down on an Athenian 
and sank it, but was attacked and crippled im¬ 
mediately by one of the Eginetan squadron. 
Now the Samothracians were expert with the 
javelin, and aimed their weapons so well, that 
they cleared the deck of the vessel which had 
disabled their own, after which they sprang 
on board, and took it. This saved the lonians. 
Xerxes, when he saw the exploit, turned fierce¬ 
ly on the Phoenicians—(he was ready, in his 
extreme vexation, to find fault with any one) 
—and ordered their heads to be cut off, to pre¬ 
vent them, he said, from casting the blame of 
their own misconduct upon braver men. Dur¬ 
ing the whole time of the battle Xerxes sate at 
the base of the hill called /Egaleos, over against 
Salamis; and whenever he saw any of his own 
captains perform any worthy exploit he in¬ 
quired concerning him; and the man’s name 
was taken down by his scribes, together with 
the names of his father and his city. Ariaram- 
nes too, a Persian, who was a friend of the lo¬ 
nians, and present at the time whereof I speak, 
had a share in bringing about the punishment 
of the Phoenicians. 

91. When the rout of the barbarians began, 
and they sought to make their escape to Pha- 
lerum, the Eginetans, awaiting them in the 
channel, performed exploits worthy to be re¬ 
corded. Through the whole of the confused 
struggle the Athenians employed themselves 
in destroying such ships as either made re¬ 
sistance or fled to shore, while the Eginetans 
dealt with those which endeavoured to escape 



276 HERODOTUS [Book viii 


down the strait; so that the Persian vessels were 
no sooner clear of the Athenians than forth¬ 
with they fell into the hands of the Eginetan 
squadron. 

92. It chanced here that there was a meeting 
between the ship of Themistocles, which was 
hasting in pursuit of the enemy, and that of 
Polycritus, son of Crius the Eginetan, which 
had just charged a Sidonian trireme. The Sido- 
nian vessel was the same that captured the 
Eginetan guard-ship off Sciathus, which had 
Pytheas, the son of Ischenoiis, on board—that 
Pytheas, I mean, who fell covered with 
wounds, and whom the Sidonians kept on 
board their ship, from admiration of his gal¬ 
lantry. This man afterwards returned in safety 
to Egina; for when the Sidonian vessel with 
its Persian crew fell into the hands of the 
Greeks, he was still found on board. Polycritus 
no sooner saw the Athenian trireme than, 
knowing at once whose vessel it was, as he ob¬ 
served that it bore the ensign of the admiral, 
he shouted to Themistocles jeeringly, and 
asked him, in a tone of reproach, if the Egine- 
tans did not show themselves rare friends to 
the Medes. At the same time, while he thus 
reproached Themistocles, Polycritus bore 
straight down on the Sidonian. Such of the bar¬ 
barian vessels as escaped from the battle fled 
to Phalerum, and there sheltered themselves 
under the protection of the land army. 

93. The Greeks who gained the greatest 
glory of all in the sea-fight off Salamis were the 
Eginetans, and after them the Athenians. The 
individuals of most distinction were Polycritus 
the Eginetan, and two Athenians, Eumenes 
of Anagyrus, and Ameinias of Pallene; the 
latter of whom had pressed Artemisia so hard. 
And assuredly, if he had known that the ves¬ 
sel carried Artemisia on board, he would never 
have given over the chase till he had either 
succeeded in taking her, or else been taken 
himself. For the Athenian captains had re¬ 
ceived special orders touching the queen; and 
moreover a reward of ten thousand drachmas 
had been proclaimed for any one who should 
make her prisoner; since there was great in¬ 
dignation felt that a woman should appear in 
arms against Athens. However, as I said be¬ 
fore, she escaped; and so did some others 
whose ships survived the engagement; and 
these were all now assembled at the port of 
Phalerum. 

94. The Athenians say that Adeimantus, the 
Corinthian commander, at the moment when 
the two fleets joined battle, was seized with 


fear, and being beyond measure alarmed, 
spread his sails, and hasted to fly away; on 
which the other Corinthians, seeing their lead¬ 
er’s ship in full flight, sailed off likewise. They 
had reached in their flight that part of the 
coast of Salamis where stands the temple of 
Minerva Sciras, when they met a light bark, a 
very strange apparition: it was never discov¬ 
ered that any one had sent it to them; and till 
it appeared they were altogether ignorant how 
the battle was going. That there was some¬ 
thing beyond nature in the matter they judged 
from this—that when the men in the bark 
drew near to their ships they addressed them, 
saying—“Adeimantus, while thou playest the 
traitor’s part, by withdrawing all these ships, 
and flying away from the fight, the Greeks 
whom thou hast deserted are defeating their 
foes as completely as they ever wished in their 
prayers.” Adeimantus, however, would not be¬ 
lieve what the men said; whereupon they told 
him “he might take them with him as hos¬ 
tages, and put them to death if he did not find 
the Greeks winning.” Then Adeimantus put 
about, both he and those who were with him; 
and they re-joined the fleet when the victory 
was already gained. Such is the tale which the 
Athenians tell concerning them of Corinth; 
these latter however do not allow its truth. On 
the contrary, they declare that they were 
among those who distinguished themselves 
most in the fight. And the rest of Greece bears 
witness in their favour. 

95. In the midst of the confusion Aristides, 
the son of Lysimachus, the Athenian, of whom 
I lately spoke as a man of the greatest excel¬ 
lence, performed the following service. He 
took a number of the Athenian heavy-armed 
troops, who had previously been stationed 
along the shore of Salamis, and, landing with 
them on the islet of Psyttaleia, slew all the Per¬ 
sians by whom it was occupied. 

96. As soon as the sea-fight was ended, the 
Greeks drew together to Salamis all the wrecks 
that were to be found in that quarter, and pre¬ 
pared themselves for another engagement, sup¬ 
posing that the king would renew the fight 
with the vessels which still remained to him. 
Many of the wrecks had been carried away by 
a westerly wind to the coast of Attica, where 
they were thrown upon the strip of shore 
called Colias. Thus not only were the prophe¬ 
cies of Bacis and Musaeus concerning this bat¬ 
tle fulfilled completely, but likewise, by the 
place to which the wrecks were drifted, the 
prediction of Lysistratus, an Athenian sooth- 



92-100 ] THE HISTORY 277 


saycr, uttered many years before these events, 
and quite forgotten at the time by all the 
Greeks, was fully accomplished. The words 
were— 

Then shall the sight of the oars fill Cohan dames 

with amazement. 

Now this must have happened as soon as the 
king was departed. 

97. Xerxes, when he saw the extent of his 
loss, began to be afraid lest the Greeks might 
be counselled by the lonians, or without their 
advice might determine to sail straight to the 
Hellespont and break down the bridges there; 
in which case he would be blocked up in Eu¬ 
rope, and run great risk of perishing. He there¬ 
fore made up his mind to fly; but, as he wished 
to hide his purpose alike from the Greeks and 
from his own people, he set to work to carry a 
mound across the channel to Salamis, and at 
the same time began fastening a number of 
Phoenician merchant ships together, to serve 
at once for a bridge and a wall. He likewise 
made many warlike preparations, as if he were 
about to engage the Cireeks once more at sea. 
Now, when these things were seen, all grew 
fully persuaded that the king was bent on re¬ 
maining, and intended to push the war in 
good earnest. Mardonius, however, was in no 
respect deceived; for long acquaintance en¬ 
abled him to read all the king’s thoughts. 
Meanwhile, Xerxes, though engaged in this 
way, sent off a messenger to carry intelligence 
of his misfortune to Persia. 

98. Nothing mortal travels so fast as these 
Persian messengers. The entire plan is a Per¬ 
sian invention; and this is the method of it. 
Along the whole line of road there are men 
(they say) stationed with horses, in number 
equal to the number of days which the journey 
takes, allowing a man and horse to each day; 
and these men will not be hindered from ac¬ 
complishing at their best speed the distance 
which they have to go, either by snow, or rain, 
or heat, or by the darkness of night. The first 
rider delivers his despatch to the second, and 
the second passes it to the third; and so it is 
borne from hand to hand along the whole line, 
like the light in the torch-race, which the 
Greeks celebrate to Vulcan. The Persians give 
the riding post in this manner, the name of 
“Angarum.” 

99. At Susa, on the arrival of the first mes¬ 
sage, which said that Xerxes was master of 
Athens, such was the delight of the Persians 

I who had remained behind, that they forthwith 

I strewed all the streets with myrtle boughs, and 


burnt incense, and fell to feasting and merri¬ 
ment. In like manner, when the second mes¬ 
sage reached them, so sore was their dismay, 
that they all with one accord rent their gar¬ 
ments, and cried aloud, and wept and wailed 
without stint. They laid the blame of the disas¬ 
ter on Mardonius; and their grief on the occa¬ 
sion was less on account of the damage done 
to their ships, than owing to the alarm which 
they felt about the safety of the king. Hence 
their trouble did not cease till Xerxes himself, 
by his arrival, put an end to their fears. 

100. And now Mardonius, perceiving that 
Xerxes took the defeat of his fleet greatly to 
heart, and suspecting that he had made up his 
mind to leave Athens and fly away, began to 
think of the likelihood of his being visited with 
punishment for having persuaded the king to 
undertake the war. He therefore considered 
that it would be the best thing for him to ad¬ 
venture further, and either become the con¬ 
queror of Greece—which was the result he 
rather expected—or else die gloriously after 
aspiring to a noble achievement. So with these 
thoughts in his mind, he said one day to the 
king:— 

“Do not grieve, master, or take so greatly 
to heart thy late loss. Our hopes hang not alto¬ 
gether on the fate of a few planks, but on our 
brave steeds and horsemen. These fellows, 
whom thou imaginest to have quite con¬ 
quered us, will not venture—no, not one of 
them—to come ashore and contend with our 
land army; nor will the Greeks who are upon 
the mainland fight our troops; such as did so 
have received their punishment. If thou so 
pleasest, we may at once attack the Pelopon- 
nese; if thou wouldst rather wait a while, that 
too is in our power. Only be not disheartened. 
For it is not possible that the Greeks can avoid 
being brought to account, alike for this and 
for their former injuries; nor can they anyhow 
escape being thy slaves. Thou shouldst there¬ 
fore do as I have said. If, however, thy mind is 
made up, and thou art resolved to retreat and 
lead away thy army, listen to the counsel 
which, in that case, I have to offer. Make not 
the Persians, O king! a laughing-stock to the 
Greeks. If thy affairs have succeeded ill, it has 
not been by their fault; thou canst not say that thy 
Persians have ever shown themselves cowards. 
What matters it if Phoenicians and Egyptians, 
Cyprians and Cilicians, have misbehaved.^— 
their misconduct touches not us. Since then thy 
Persians are without fault, be advised by me. 
Depart home, if thou art so minded, and take 




278 

with thee the bulk of thy army; but first let me 
choose out 300,000 troops, and let it be my 
task to bring Greece beneath thy sway.” 

101. Xerxes, when he heard these words, 
felt a sense of joy and delight, like a man who 
is relieved from care. Answering Mardonius, 
therefore, “that he would consider his coun¬ 
sel, and let him know which course he might 
prefer,” Xerxes proceeded to consult with the 
chief men among the Persians; and because 
Artemisia on the former occasion had shown 
herself the only person who knew what was 
best to be done, he was pleased to summon 
her to advise him now. As soon as she arrived, 
he put forth all the rest, both councillors and 
bodyguards, and said to her:— 

“Mardonius wishes me to stay and attack 
the Peloponnese. My Persians, he says, and my 
other land forces, are not to blame for the disas¬ 
ters which have befallen our arms; and of this 
he declares they would very gladly give me 
the proof. He therefore exhorts me, either to 
stay and act as I have said, or to let him choose 
out 300,000 of my troops—wherewith he un¬ 
dertakes to reduce Greece beneath my sway— 
while I myself retire with the rest of my forces, 
and withdraw into my own country. Do thou, 
therefore, as thou didst counsel me so wisely 
to decline the sea-fight, now also advise me in 
this matter, and say, which course of the twain 
I ought to take for my own good.” 

102. Thus did the king ask Artemisia’s 
counsel; and the following are the words 
wherewith she answered him:— 

“ ’Tis a hard thing, O king! to give the best 
possible advice to one who asks our counsel. 
Nevertheless, as thy affairs now stand, it seem- 
eth to me that thou wilt do right to return 
home. As for Mardonius, if he prefers to re¬ 
main, and undertakes to do as he has said, 
leave him behind by all means, with the troops 
which he desires. If his design succeeds, and he 
subdues the Greeks, as he promises, thine is the 
conquest, master; for thy slaves will have ac¬ 
complished it. If, on the other hand, affairs run 
counter to his wishes, we can suffer no great 
loss, so long as thou art safe, and thy house is 
in no danger. The Greeks, too, while thou liv- 
est, and thy house flourishes, must be prepared 
to fight full many a battle for their freedom; 
whereas if Mardonius fall, it matters nothing 
—they will have gained but a poor triumph— 
a victory over one of thy slaves! Remember 
also, thou goest home having gained the pur¬ 
pose of thy exp>edition; for thou hast burnt 
Athens!” 


[Book viii 

103. The advice of Artemesia pleased Xer¬ 
xes well; for she had exactly uttered his own 
thoughts. I, for my part, do not believe that 
he would have remained had all his counsel¬ 
lors, both men and women, united to urge his 
stay, so great was the alarm that he felt. As it 
was, he gave praise to Artemisia, and entrust¬ 
ed certain of his children to her care, ordering 
her to convey them to Ephesus; for he had 
been accompanied on the expedition by some 
of his natural sons. 

104. He likewise sent away at this time one 
of the principal of his eunuchs, a man named 
Hermotimus, a Pedasian, who was bidden to 
take charge of these sons. Now the Pedasians 
inhabit the region above Halicarnassus; and it 
is related of them, that in their country the 
following circumstance happens: when a mis¬ 
chance is about to befall any of their neigh¬ 
bours within a certain time, the priestess of 
Minerva in their city grows a long beard. This 
has already taken place on two occasions. 

105. The Hermotimus of whom I spoke 
above was, as I said, a Pedasian; and he, of all 
men whom we know, took the most cruel 
vengeance on the person who had done him an 
injury. He had been made a prisoner of war, 
and when his captors sold him, he was bought 
by a certain Panionius, a native of Chios, who 
made his living by a most nefarious traffic. 
Whenever he could get any boys of unusual 
beauty, he made them eunuchs, and, carrying 
them to Sardis or Ephesus, sold them for large 
sums of money. For the barbarians value eu¬ 
nuchs more than others, since they regard them 
as more trustworthy. Many were the slaves 
that Panionius, who made his living by the 
practice, had thus treated; and among them 
was this Hermotimus of whom I have here 
made mention. However, he was not without 
his share of good fortune; for after a while he 
was sent from Sardis, together with other gifts, 
as a present to the king. Nor was it long before 
he came to be esteemed by Xerxes more highly 
than all his eunuchs. 

106. When the king was on his way to Ath¬ 
ens with the Persian army, and abode for a 
time at Sardis, Hermotimus happened to make 
a journey upon business into Mysia; and there, 
in a district which is called Atarneus, but be¬ 
longs to Chios, he chanced to fall in with Pan¬ 
ionius. Recognising him at once, he entered 
into a long and friendly talk with him, wherein 
he counted up the numerous blessings he en¬ 
joyed through his means, and promised him 
all manner of favours in return, if he would 


HERODOTUS 



I 0 I-I 09 1 THE HISTORY 279 


bring his household to Sardis and live there. 
Panionius was overjoyed, and, accepting the 
oiler made him, came presently, and brought 
with him his wife and children. Then Hermo- 
timus, when he had got Panionius and all his 
family into his power, addressed him in these 
words:— 

“Thou man, who gettest a living by viler 
deeds than any one else in the whole world, 
what wrong to thee or thine had I or any of 
mine done, that thou shouldst have made me 
the nothing that I now am? Ah! surely thou 
thoughtest that the gods took no note of thy 
crimes. But they in their jiLstice have delivered 
thee, the doer of unrighteousness, into my 
hands; and now thou canst not complain of 
the vengeance which I am resolved to take on 
thee.” 

After these reproaches, Hermotimus com¬ 
manded the four sons of Panionius to he 
brought, and forced the father to make them 
eunuchs with his own hand. Unable to resist, 
he did as Hermotimus required; and then his 
sons were made to treat him in the self-same 
way. So in this way there came to Panionius 
requital at the hands of Hermotimus. 

107. Xerxes, after charging Artemesia to 
convey his sons safe to Ephesus, sent for Mar- 
donius, and bade him choose from all his army 
such men as he wished, and see that he made 
his achievements answer to his promises. Dur¬ 
ing this day he did no more; but no sooner was 
night come, than he issued his orders, and at 
once the captains of the ships left Phalerum, 
and bore away for the Hellespont, each mak¬ 
ing all the speed he could, and hasting to guard 
the bridges against the king’s return. On their 
way, as they sailed by Zoster, where certain 
narrow points of land project into the sea, they 
took the cliffs for vessels, and fled far away in 
alarm. Discovering their mistake, however, 
after a time, they joined company once more, 
and proceeded upon their voyage. 

108. Next day the Greeks, seeing the land 
force of the barbarians encamped in the same 
place, thought that their ships must still be ly¬ 
ing at Phalerum; and, expecting another at¬ 
tack from that quarter, made preparations to 
defend themselves. Soon however news came 
that the ships were all departed and gone 
away; whereupon it was instantly resolved to 
make sail in pursuit. They went as far as An¬ 
dros; but, seeing nothing of the Persian fleet, 
they stopped at that place, and held a council 
of war. At this council Themistocles advised 
that the Greeks should follow on through the 


islands, still pressing the pursuit, and making 
all haste to the Hellespont, there to break 
down the bridges. Euryhiades, however, de¬ 
livered a contrary opinion. “If,” he said, “the 
Greeks should break down the bridges, it 
would be the worst thing that could possibly 
hap[')en for Greece. The Persian, supposing 
that his retreat were cut off, and he compelled 
to remain in Eurof'>e, would he sure never to 
give them any peace. Inaction on his part 
would ruin all his affairs, and leave him no 
chance of ever getting back to Asia—nay, 
would even aiuse his army to perish by famine: 
whereas, if he bestirred himself, and acted vig¬ 
orously, it was likely that the whole of Europe 
would in course ot time become subject to him; 
since, by degrees, the various towns and tribes 
would either fall before his arms, or else agree 
to terms of submission; and in this way, his 
troops would find food sufficient for them, 
since each year the Cireek harvest would be 
theirs. As it was, the Persian, because he had 
lost the sea-fight, intended evidently to remain 
no longer in Europe. The Greeks ought to let 
him depart; and when he was gone from 
among them, and had returned into his own 
country, then would be the time for them to 
contend with him for the possession of that.” 

The other captains of the Peloponnesians de¬ 
clared themselves of the same mind. 

109. Whereupon Themistocles, finding that 
the majority was against him, and that he 
could not persuade them to push on to the Hel¬ 
lespont, changed round, and addressing him¬ 
self to the Athenians, who of all the allies were 
the most nettled at the enemy’s escape, and 
who eagerly desired, if the other Greeks would 
not stir, to sail on by themselves to the Helles¬ 
pont and break the bridges, spake as follows:— 

“I have often myself witnessed occasions, 
and I have heard of many more from others, 
where men who had been conquered by an 
enemy, having been driven quite to despera¬ 
tion, have renewed the fight, and retrieved 
their former disasters. We have now had the 
great good luck to save both ourselves and all 
Greece by the repulse of this vast cloud of men; 
let us then be content and not press them too 
hard, now that they have begun to fly. Be sure 
we have not done this by our own might. It is 
the work of gods and heroes, who were jealous 
that one man should be king at once of Eu¬ 
rope and of Asia—more especially a man like 
this, unholy and presumptuous—a man who 
esteems alike things sacred and things profane; 
who has cast down and burnt the very images 



280 HERODOTUS [Book viii 


of the gods themselves; who even caused the 
sea to be scourged with rods and commanded 
fetters to be thrown into it. At present all is 
well with us—let us then abide in Greece, and 
look to ourselves and to our families. The bar¬ 
barian is clean gone—we have driven him off 
—let each now repair his own house, and sow 
his land diligently. In the spring we will take 
ship and sail to the Hellespont and to Ionia!” 

All this Themistocles said in the hope of es¬ 
tablishing a claim, upon the king; for he want¬ 
ed to have a safe retreat in case any mischance 
should befall him at Athens—which indeed 
came to pass afterwards. 

no. At present, however, he dissembled; 
and the Athenians were persuaded by his 
words. For they were ready now to do what¬ 
ever he advised; since they had always es¬ 
teemed him a wise man, and he had lately 
proved himself most truly wise and well-judg¬ 
ing. Accordingly, they came in to his views; 
whereupon he lost no time in sending messen¬ 
gers, on board a light bark, to the king, choos¬ 
ing for this purpose men whom he could trust 
to keep his instructions secret, even although 
they should be put to every kind of torture. 
Among them was the house-slave Sicinnus, 
the same whom he had made use of previously. 
When the men reached Attica, all the others 
stayed with the boat; but Sicinnus went up to 
the king, and spake to him as follows:— 

“I am sent to thee by Themistocles, the son 
of Neocles, who is the leader of the Athenians, 
and the wisest and bravest man of all the allies, 
to bear thee this message: ‘Themistocles the 
Athenian, anxious to render thee a service, has 
restrained the Greeks, who were impatient to 
pursue thy ships, and to break up the bridges 
at the Hellespont. Now, therefore, return 
home at thy leisure.’ ” 

The messengers, when they had performed 
their errand, sailed back to the fleet. 

III. And the Greeks, having resolved that 
they would neither proceed further in pursuit 
of the barbarians, nor push forward to the Hel¬ 
lespont and destroy the passage, laid siege to 
Andros, intending to take the town by storm. 
For Themistocles had required the Andrians 
to pay down a sum of money; and they had re¬ 
fused, being the first of all the islanders who 
did so. To his declaration, “that the money 
must needs be paid, as the Athenians had 
brought with him two mighty gods—Persua¬ 
sion and Necessity,” they made reply, that 
“Athens might well be a great and glorious 
city, since she was blest with such excellent 


gods; but they were wretchedly poor, stinted 
for land, and cursed with two unprofitable 
gods, who always dwelt with them and would 
never quit their island—to wit. Poverty and 
Helplessness. These were the gods of the An¬ 
drians, and therefore they would not pay the 
money. For the power of Athens could not pos¬ 
sibly be stronger than their inability.” This 
reply, coupled with the refusal to pay the sum 
required, caused their city to be besieged by 
the Greeks. 

112. Meanwhile Themistocles, who never 
ceased his pursuit of gain, sent threatening 
messages to the other islanders with demands 
for different sums, employing the same mes¬ 
sengers and the same words as he had used 
towards the Andrians. “If,” he said, “they did 
not send him the amount required, he would 
bring the Greek fleet upon them, and besiege 
them till he took their cities.” By these means 
he collected large sums from the Carystians 
and the Parians, who, when they heard that 
Andros was already besieged, and that Them¬ 
istocles was the best esteemed of all the cap¬ 
tains, sent the money through fear. Whether 
any of the other islanders did the like, I cannot 
say for certain; but I think some did besides 
those I have mentioned. However, the Carysti¬ 
ans, though they complied, were not spared 
any the more; but Themistocles was softened 
by the Parians’ gift, and therefore they re¬ 
ceived no visit from the army. In this way it 
was that Themistocles, during his stay at An¬ 
dros, obtained money from the islanders, un¬ 
beknown to the other captains. 

113. King Xerxes and his army waited but a 
few days after the sea-fight, and then withdrew 
into Bceotia by the road which they had fol¬ 
lowed on their advance. It was the wish of 
Mardonius to escort the king a part of the way; 
and as the time of year was no longer suitable 
for carrying on war, he thought it best to win¬ 
ter in Thessaly, and wait for the spring before 
he attempted the Peloponnese. After the army 
was come into Thessaly, Mardonius made 
choice of the troops that were to stay with him; 
and, first of all, he took the whole body called 
the “Immortals,” except only their leader, Hy- 
darnes, who refused to quit the person of the 
king. Next, he chose the Persians who wore 
breastplates, and the thousand picked horse; 
likewise the Medes, the Sacans, the Bactrians, 
and the Indians, foot and horse equally. These 
nations he took entire: from the rest of the al¬ 
lies he culled a few men, taking either such as 
were remarkable for their appearance, or else 




THE HISTORY 281 


such as had performed, to his knowledge, 
some valiant deed. The Persians furnished him 
with the greatest number of troops, men who 
were adorned with chains and armlets. Next 
to them were the Medes, who in number 
equalled the Persians, but in valour fell short 
of them. The whole army, reckoning the horse¬ 
men with the rest, amounted to 300,000 men. 

114. At the time when Mardonius was mak¬ 
ing choice of his troops, and Xerxes still con¬ 
tinued in Thessaly, the Laceda-monians re¬ 
ceived a message from the Delphic oracle, bid¬ 
ding them seek satisfaction at the hands of 
Xerxes for the death of Leonidas, and take 
whatever he chose to give them. So the Spar¬ 
tans sent a herald with all speed into Thessaly, 
who arrived while the entire Persian army was 
still there. This man, being brought before the 
king, spake as follows:— 

“King of the Medes, the Lacedaemonians 
and the Heracleids of Sparta require of thee 
the satisfaction due for bloodshed, because 
thou slewest their king, who fell fighting for 
Greece.” 

Xerxes laughed, and for a long time spake 
not a word. At last, however, he pointed to 
Mardonius, who was standing by him, and 
said:—“Mardonius here shall give them the 
satisfaction they deserve to get.” And the her¬ 
ald accepted the answer, and forthwith went 
his way. 

115. Xerxes, after this, left Mardonius in 
Thessaly, and marched away himself, at his 
best speed, toward the Hellespont. In five-and- 
forty days he reached the place of passage, 
where he arrived with scarce a fraction, so to 
speak, of his former army. All along their line 
of march, in every country where they 
chanced to be, his soldiers seized and devoured 
whatever corn they could find belonging to the 
inhabitants; while, if no corn was to be found, 
they gathered the grass that grew in the fields, 
and stripped the trees, whether cultivated or 
wild, alike of their bark and of their leaves, 
and so fed themselves. They left nothing any¬ 
where, so hard were they pressed by hunger. 
Plague too and dysentery attacked the troops 
while still upon their march, and greatly 
thinned their ranks. Many died; others fell sick 
and were left behind in the different cities that 
lay upon the route, the inhabitants being strict¬ 
ly charged by Xerxes to tend and feed them. 
Of these some remained in Thessaly, others 
in Siris of Paeonia, others again in Macedon. 
Here Xerxes, on his march into Greece, had 
left the sacred car and steeds of Jove; which 


upon his return he was unable to recover; for 
the Paronians had disposed of them to the 
Thracians, and, when Xerxes demanded them 
back, they said that the Thracian tribes who 
dwelt about the sources of the Strymon had 
stolen the mares as they pastured. 

116. Here too a Thracian chieftain, king of 
the Bisaltians and of Crestonia, did a deed 
which went beyond nature. He had refused to 
become the willing slave of Xerxes, and had 
fled before him into the heights of Rhodope, 
at the same time forbidding his sons to take 
part in the expedition against Greece. But they, 
either because they cared little for his orders, 
or because they wished greatly to see the war, 
joined the army of Xerxes. At this time they 
had all returned home to him—the number of 
the men was six—quite safe and sound. But 
their father took them, and punished their 
offence by plucking out their eyes from the 
sockets. Such was the treatment which these 
men received. 

117. The Persians, having journeyed 
through Thrace and reached the passage, en¬ 
tered their ships hastily and crossed the Helles¬ 
pont to Abydos. The bridges were not found 
stretched across the strait; since a storm had 
broken and dispersed them. At Abydos the 
troops halted, and, obtaining more abundant 
provision than they had yet got upon their 
march, they fed without stint; from which 
cause, added to the change in their water, great 
numbers of those who had hitherto escaped 
perished. The remainder, together with Xer¬ 
xes himself, came safe to Sardis. 

118. There is likewise another account given 
of the return of the king. It is said that when 
Xerxes on his way from Athens arrived at Ei'on 
upon the Strymon, he gave up travelling by 
land, and, intrusting Hydarnes with the con¬ 
duct of his forces to the Hellespont, embarked 
himself on board a Phoenician ship, and so 
crossed into Asia. On his voyage the ship was 
assailed by a strong wind blowing from the 
mouth of the Strymon, which caused the sea 
to run high. As the storm increased, and the 
ship laboured heavily, because of the number 
of the Persians who had come in the king’s 
train, and who now crowded the deck, Xerxes 
was seized with fear, and called out to the 
helmsman in a loud voice, asking him, if there 
were any means whereby they might escape 
the danger. “No means, master,” the helms¬ 
man answered, “unless we could be quit of 
these too numerous passengers.” Xerxes, they 
say, on hearing this, addressed the Persians as 




282 HERODOTUS [Book viii 


follows: “Men of Persia,” he said, “now is the 
time for you to show what love ye bear your 
king. My safety, as it seems, depends wholly 
upon you.” So spake the king; and the Persians 
instantly made obeisance, and then leapt over 
into the sea. Thus was the ship lightened, and 
Xerxes got safe to Asia. As soon as he had 
reached the shore, he sent for the helmsman, 
and gave him a golden crown because he had 
preserved the life of the king,—but because he 
had caused the death of a number of Persians, 
he ordered his head to be struck from his 
shoulders. 

119. Such is the other account which is giv¬ 
en of the return of Xerxes; but to me it seems 
quite unworthy of belief, alike in other re¬ 
spects, and in what relates to the Persians. For 
had the helmsman made any such speech to 
Xerxes, I suppose there is not one man in ten 
thousand who will doubt that this is the course 
which the king would have followed:—he 
would have made the men upon the ship’s 
deck, who were not only Persians, but Persians 
of the very highest rank, quit their place and 
go down below; and would have cast into the 
sea an equal number of the rowers, who were 
Phoenicians. But the truth is, that the king, as 
I have already said, returned into Asia by the 
same road as the rest of the army. 

120. I will add a strong proof of this. It is 
certain that Xerxes on his way back from 
Greece passed through Abdera, where he made 
a contract of friendship with the inhabitants, 
and presented them with a golden scymitar, 
and a tiara broidered with gold. The Abderites 
declare—but I put no faith in this part of their 
story—that from the time of the king’s leaving 
Athens, he never once loosed his girdle till he 
came to their city, since it was not till then that 
he felt himself in safety. Now Abdera is nearer 
to the Hellespont than Ei’on and the Strymon, 
where Xerxes, according to the other tale, took 
ship. 

121. Meanwhile the Greeks, finding that 
they could not capture Andros, sailed away to 
Carystus, and wasted the lands of the Carysti- 
ans, after which they returned to Salamis. Ar¬ 
rived here, they proceeded, before entering on 
any other matter, to make choice of the first- 
fruits which should be set apart as offerings to 
the gods. These consisted of divers gifts; 
among them were three Phoenician triremes, 
one of which was dedicated at the Isthmus, 
where it continued to my day; another at Suni- 
um; and the third, at Salamis itself, which was 
devoted to Ajax. This done, they made a divi¬ 


sion of the booty, and sent away the first-fruits 
to Delphi. Thereof was made the statue, hold¬ 
ing in its hand the beak of a ship, which is 
twelve cubits high, and which stands in the 
same place with the golden one of Alexander 
the Macedonian. 

122. After the first-fruits had been sent to 
Delphi, the Greeks made inquiry of the god, 
in the name of their whole body, if he had re¬ 
ceived his full share of the spoils and was satis¬ 
fied therewith. The god made answer that all 
the other Greeks had paid him his full due, 
except only the Eginetans; on them he had still 
a claim for the prize of valour which they had 
gained at Salamis. So the Eginetans, when 
they heard this, dedicated the three golden 
stars which stand on the top of a bronze mast 
in the corner near the bowl offered by Crcesus. 

123. When the spoils had been divided, the 
Greeks sailed to the Isthmus, where a prize of 
valour was to be awarded to the man who, of 
all the Greeks, had shown the most merit dur¬ 
ing the war. When the chiefs were all come, 
they met at the altar of Neptune, and took the 
ballots wherewith they were to give their votes 
for the first and for the second in merit. Then 
each man gave himself the first vote, since 
each considered that he was himself the worth¬ 
iest; but the second votes were given chiefly to 
Themistocles. In this way, while the others re¬ 
ceived but one vote apiece, Themistocles had 
for the second prize a large majority of the 
suffrages. 

124. Envy, however, hindered the chiefs 
from coming to a decision, and they all sailed 
away to their homes without making any 
award. Nevertheless Themistocles was regard¬ 
ed everywhere as by far the wisest man of all 
the Greeks; and the whole country rang with 
his fame. As the chiefs who fought at Salamis, 
notwithstanding that he was really entitled to 
the prize, had withheld his honour from him, 
he went without delay to Lacedaemon, in the 
hope that he would be honoured there. And 
the Lacedaemonians received him handsomely, 
and paid him great respect. The prize of val¬ 
our indeed, which was a crown of olive, they 
gave to Eurybiades; but Themistocles was giv¬ 
en a crown of olive too, as the prize of wisdom 
and dexterity. He was likewise presented with 
the most beautiful chariot that could be found 
in Sparta; and after receiving abundant praises, 
was, upon his departure, escorted as far as the 
borders of Tegea, by the three hundred picked 
Spartans, who are called the Knights. Never 
was it known, either before or since, that the 




THE HISTORY 2cS3 


Spartans escorted a man out of their city. 

125. On the return of Themistocles to Ath¬ 
ens, Timodemus of Aphidnae, who was one of 
his enemies, but otherwise a man of no repute, 
became so maddened with envy that he openly 
railed against him, and, reproaching him with 
his journey to Sparta, said—“ ’Twas not his 
own merit that had won him honour from the 
men of Lacedaemon, but the fame of Athens, 
his country.” Then Themistocles, seeing that 
Timodemus repeated this phrase unceasingly, 
replied— 

“Thus stands the case, friend. I had never 
got this honour from the Spartans, had I been 
a Belbinite—nor thou, hadst thou been an 
Athenian!” 

126. Artabazus, the son of Pharnaces, a man 
whom the Persians had always held in much 
esteem, but who, after the aflair of Plat.xa, rose 
still higher in their opinion, escorted King 
Xerxes as far as the strait, with sixty thousand 
of the chosen troops of Mardonius. When the 
king was safe in Asia, Artabazus set out upon 
his return; and on arriving near Pallenc, and 
finding that Mardonius had gone into winter- 
quarters in Thessaly and Macedonia, and was 
in no hurry for him to join the camp, he 
thought it his bounden duty, as the Potidarans 
had just revolted, to occupy himself in reduc¬ 
ing them to slavery. For as soon as the king 
had passed beyond their territory, and the Per¬ 
sian fleet had made its hasty flight from Sala- 
mis, the Potidiuans revolted from the barbari¬ 
ans openly; as likewise did all the other in¬ 
habitants of that peninsula. 

127. Artabazus, therefore, laid siege to Po- 
tidaea; and having a suspicion that the Olyn- 
thians were likely to revolt shortly, he be¬ 
sieged their city also. Now Olynthus was at 
that time held by the Bottiaeans, who had been 
driven from the parts about the Thermaic Gulf 
by the Macedonians. Artabazus took the city, 
and, having so done, led out all the inhabitants 
to a marsh in the neighbourhood, and there 
slew them. After this he delivered the place 
into the hands of the people called Chalci- 
deans, having first appointed Critobulus of 
Torone to be governor. Such was the way in 
which the Chalcideans got Olynthus. 

128. When this town had fallen, Artabazus 
pressed the siege of Potidaea all the more un¬ 
remittingly; and was pushing his operations 
with vigour, when Timoxenus, captain of the 
Scionaeans, entered into a plot to betray the 
town to him. How the matter was managed at 
first, I cannot pretend to say, for no account 


has come down to us: but at the last this is 
what happened. Whenever Timoxenus wished 
to send a letter to Artabazus, or Artabazus to 
send one to Timoxenus, the letter was written 
on a strip of paper, and rolled round the 
notched end of an arrow-shaft; the feathers 
were then put on over the paper, and the ar¬ 
row thus prepared was shot to some place 
agreed upon. But after a while the plot of 
Timoxenus to betray Potidxa was discovered 
in this way. Artabazus, on one occasion, shot 
off his arrow, intending to send it to the ac¬ 
customed place, but, missing his mark, hit one 
of the Potidarans in the shoulder. A crowd 
gathered about the wounded man, as common¬ 
ly happens in war; and when the arrow was 
pulled out, they noticed the paper, and 
straightway carried it to the captains who were 
present from the various cities of the penin¬ 
sula. The captains read the letter, and, finding 
who the traitor was, nevertheless resolved, out 
of regard for the city of Scione, that as they 
did not wish the Sclonarans to be thenceforth 
branded with the name of traitors, they would 
not bring against him any charge of treachery. 
Such accordingly was the mode in which this 
plot was discovered. 

129. After Artabazus had continued the 
siege by the space of three months, it happened 
that there was an unusual ebb of the tide, 
which lasted a long while. So when the bar¬ 
barians saw that what had been sea was now 
no more than a swamp, they determined to 
push across it into Pallcnc. And now the troops 
had already made good two-fifths of their pas¬ 
sage, and three-fifths still remained before they 
could reach Pallene, when the tide came in 
with a very high flood, higher than had ever 
been seen before, as the inhabitants of those 
parts declare, though high floods are by no 
means uncommon. All who were not able to 
swim perished immediately; the rest were slain 
by the Potidseans, who bore down upon them 
in their sailing vessels. The Potidaeans say 
that what caused this swell and flood, and so 
brought about the disaster of the Persians 
which ensued therefrom, was the profanation, 
by the very men now destroyed in the sea, of 
the temple and image of Neptune, situated in 
thei'r suburb. And in this they seem to me to 
say well. Artabazus afterwards led away the 
remainder of his army, and joined Mardonius 
in Thessaly. Thus fared it with the Persians 
who escorted the king to the strait. 

130. As for that part of the fleet of Xerxes 
which had survived the battle, when it had 



284 

made good its escape from Salamis to the coast 
of Asia, and conveyed the king with his army 
across the strait from the Chersonese to Aby- 
dos, it passed the winter at Cyme. On the first 
approach of spring, there was an early muster 
of the ships at Samos, where some of them in¬ 
deed had remained throughout the winter. 
Most of the men-at-arms who served on board 
were Persians, or else Medes; and the com¬ 
mand of the fleet had been taken by Mardontes, 
the son of Bagxus, and Artayntes, the son of 
Artachaeus; while there was likewise a third 
commander, Ithamitres, the nephew of Ar¬ 
tayntes, whom his uncle had advanced to the 
post. Further west than Samos, however, they 
did not venture to proceed; for they remem¬ 
bered what a defeat they had suffered, and 
there was no one to compel them to approach 
any nearer to Greece. They therefore remained 
at Samos, and kept watch over Ionia, to hinder 
it from breaking into revolt. The whole num¬ 
ber of their ships, including those furnished by 
the lonians, was three hundred. It did not 
enter into their thoughts that the Greeks 
would proceed against Ionia; on the contrary, 
they supposed that the defence of their own 
country would content them, more especially 
as they had not pursued the Persian fleet when 
it fled from Salamis, but had so readily given 
up the chase. They despaired, however, alto¬ 
gether of gaining any success by sea them¬ 
selves, though by land they thought that 
Mardonius was quite sure of victory. So they 
remained at Samos, and took counsel together, 
if by any means they might harass the enemy, 
at the same time that they waited eagerly to 
hear how matters would proceed with Mar¬ 
donius. 

131. The approach of spring, and the knowl¬ 
edge that Mardonius was in Thessaly, roused 
the Greeks from inaction. Their land force in¬ 
deed was not yet come together; but the fleet, 
consisting of one hundred and ten ships, pro¬ 
ceeded to Egina, under the command of Leo- 
tychides. This Leotychides, who was both gen¬ 
eral and admiral, was the son of Menares, the 
son of Agesilaiis, the son of Hippocratides, the 
son of Leotychides, the son of Anaxilaiis, the 
son of Archidamus, the son of Anaxandrides, 
the son of Theopompus, the son of Nicander, 
the son of Charillus, the son of Eunomus, the 
son of Polydectes, the son of Prytanis, the son 
of Euryphon, the son of Procles, the son of 
Aristodemus, the son of Aristomachus, the son 
of Cleodaeus, the son of Hyllus, the son of 
Hercules. He belonged to the younger branch 


[Book viii 

of the royal house. All his ancestors, except the 
two next in the above list to himself, had been 
kings of Sparta. The Athenian vessels were 
commanded by Xanthippus, the son of Ari- 
phron. 

132. When the whole fleet was collected to¬ 
gether at Egina, ambassadors from Ionia ar¬ 
rived at the Greek station; they had but just 
come from paying a visit to Sparta, where they 
had been intreating the Lacedaemonians to 
undertake the deliverance of their native land. 
One of these ambassadors was Herodotus, the 
son of Basileides. Originally they were seven 
in number; and the whole seven had conspired 
to slay Strattis the tyrant of Chios; one, how¬ 
ever, of those engaged in the plot betrayed the 
enterprise; and the conspiracy being in this 
way discovered, Herodotus, and the remain¬ 
ing five, quitted Chios, and went straight to 
Sparta, whence they had now proceeded to 
Egina, their object being to beseech the Greeks 
that they would pass over to Ionia. It was not, 
however, without difficulty that they were in¬ 
duced to advance even so far as Delos. All be¬ 
yond that seemed to the Greeks full of danger; 
the places were quite unknown to them, and 
to their fancy swarmed with Persian troops; 
as for Samos, it appeared to them as far off 
as the Pillars of Hercules. Thus it came to pass, 
that at the very same time the barbarians were 
hindered by their fears from venturing any 
further west than Samos, and the prayers of 
the Chians failed to induce the Greeks to ad¬ 
vance any further east than Delos. Terror 
guarded the mid region. 

133. The Greek fleet was now on its way 
to Delos; but Mardonius still abode in his 
winter-quarters in Thessaly. When he was 
about to leave them, he despatched a man 
named Mys, a Europian by birth, to go and 
consult the different oracles, giving him orders 
to put questions everywhere to all the oracles 
whereof he found it possible to make trial. 
What it was that he wanted to know, when he 
gave Mys these orders, I am not able to say, for 
no account has reached me of the matter; but 
for my own part, I suppose that he sent to in¬ 
quire concerning the business which he had in 
hand, and not for any other purpose. 

134. Mys, it is certain, went to Lebadeia, 
and, by the payment of a sum of money, in¬ 
duced one of the inhabitants to go down to 
Trophonius; he likewise visited Abac of the 
Phocians, and there consulted the god; while 
at Thebes, to which place he went first of all, 
he not only got access to Apollo Ismenius (of 


HERODOTUS 




THE HISTORY 28? 


whom inquiry is made by means of victims, 
according to the custom practised also at Olym¬ 
pia), but likewise prevailed on a man, who 
was not a Theban but a foreigner, to pass the 
night in the temple of Amphiaraiis. No The¬ 
ban can lawfully consult this oracle, for the 
following reason: Amphiaraiis by an oracle 
gave the Thebans their choice, to have him for 
their prophet or for their helper in war; he 
bade them elect between the two, and forego 
either one or the other; so they chose rather to 
have him for their helper. On this account it 
is unlawful for a Theban to sleep in his temple. 

135. One thing which the Thebans declare 
to have happened at this time is to me very 
surprising. Mys, the Europian, they say, after 
he had gone about to all the oracles, came at 
last to the sacred precinct of Apollo Ptoiis. The 
place itself bears the name of Ptoiim; it is in 
the country of the Thebans, and is situated on 
the mountain side overlooking Lake Copais, 
only a very little way from the town called 
Acra-phia. Here Mys arrived, and entered the 
temple, followed by three Theban citizens— 
picked men whom the state had appointed to 
take down whatever answer the god might 
give. No sooner was he entered than the proph¬ 
et delivered him an oracle, but in a foreign 
tongue; so that his Theban attendants were 
astonished, hearing a strange language when 
they expected Greek, and did not know what 
to do. Mys, however, the Europian, snatched 
from their hands the tablet which they had 
brought with them, and wrote down what the 
prophet uttered. The reply, he told them, was 
in the Carian dialect. After this, Mys departed 
and returned to Thessaly. 

136. Mardonius, when he had read the an¬ 
swers given by the oracles, sent next an envoy 
to Athens. This was Alexander, the son of 
Amyntas, a Macedonian, of whom he made 
choice for two reasons. Alexander was con¬ 
nected with the Persians by family ties; for 
Gygaea, who was the daughter of Amyntas, and 
sister to Alexander himself, was married to 
Bubares, a Persian, and by him had a son, to 
wit, Amyntas of Asia; who was named after 
his mother’s father, and enjoyed the revenues 
of Alabanda, a large city of Phrygia, which 
had been assigned him by the king. Alexan¬ 
der was likewise (and of this too Mardonius 
was well aware), both by services which he 
had rendered, and by formal compact of 
friendship, connected with Athens. Mardonius 
therefore thought that, by sending him, he 
would be most likely to gain over the Atheni¬ 


ans to the Persian side. He had heard that they 
were a numerous and a warlike people, and 
he knew that the disasters which had befallen 
the Persians by sea were mainly their work; 
he therefore expected that, if he could form 
alliance with them, he would easily get the 
mastery of the sea (as indeed he would have 
done, beyond a doubt), while by land he be¬ 
lieved that he was already greatly superior; 
and so he thought by this alliance to make 
sure of overcoming the Greeks. Perhaps, too, 
the oracles leant this way, and counselled him 
to make Athens his friend: so that it may 
have been in obedience to them that he sent 
the embassy. 

137. This Alexander was descended in the 
seventh degree from Perdiccas, who obtained 
the sovereignty over the Macedonians in the 
way which I will now relate. Three brothers, 
descendants of Tcmenus, fled from Argos to 
the Illyrians; their names were Gauanes, Ae- 
ropus, and Perdiccas. From Illyria they went 
across to Upper Macedonia, where they came 
to a certain town called LebcXa. There they 
hired themselves out to serve the king in differ¬ 
ent employs; one tended the horses; another 
looked after the cows; while Perdiccas, who 
was the youngest, took charge of the smaller 
cattle. In those early times poverty was not 
confined to the people: kings themselves were 
poor, and so here it was the king’s wife who 
cooked the victuals. Now, whenever she baked 
the bread, she always observed that the loaf of 
the labouring boy Perdiccas swelled to double 
its natural size. So the queen, finding this nev¬ 
er fail, spoke of it to her husband. Directly 
that it came to his ears, the thought struck him 
that it was a miracle, and boded something of 
no small moment. He therefore sent for the 
three labourers, and told them to begone out 
of his dominions. They answered, “they had a 
right to their wages; if he would pay them 
what was due, they were quite willing to go.” 
Now it happened that the sun was shining 
down the chimney into the room where they 
were; and the king, hearing them talk of 
wages, lost his wits, and said, “There are the 
wages which you deserve; take that—I give it 
you!’’ and pointed, as he spoke, to the sun¬ 
shine. The two elder brothers, Gauanes and 
Aeropus, stood aghast at the reply, and did 
nothing; but the boy, who had a knife in his 
hand, made a mark with it round the sunshine 
on the floor of the room, and said, “O king! 
we accept your payment.” Then he received 
the light of the sun three times into his bosom. 





286 HERODOTUS [Book viii 


and so went away; and his brothers went with 
him. 

138. When they were gone, one of those who 
sat by told the king what the youngest of the 
three had done, and hinted that he must have 
had some meaning in accepting the wages 
given. Then the king, when he heard what 
had happened, was angry, and sent horsemen 
after the youths to slay them. Now there is a 
river in Macedonia to which the descendants 
of these Argives offer sacrifice as their saviour. 
This stream swelled so much, as soon as the 
sons of Temenus were safe across, that the 
horsemen found it impossible to follow. So the 
brothers escaped into another part of Mace¬ 
donia, and took up their abode near the place 
called “the Gardens of Midas, son of Gordias.” 
In these gardens there are roses which grow 
of themselves, so sweet that no others can 
come near them, and with blossoms that have 
as many as sixty petals apiece. It was here, ac¬ 
cording to the Macedonians, that Silenus was 
made a prisoner. Above the gardens stands a 
mountain called Bermius, which is so cold that 
none can reach the top. Here the brothers 
made their abode; and from this place by de¬ 
grees they conquered all Macedonia. 

139. From the Perdiccas of whom we have 
here spoken, Alexander was descended in the 
following way:—Alexander was the son of 
Amyntas, Amyntas of Alcetas; the father of 
Alcetas was Aeropus; of Aeropus, Philip; of 
Philip, Argseus; of Argaeus, Perdiccas, the first 
sovereign. Such was the descent of Alexander. 

140. (§ I.) When Alexander reached Ath¬ 
ens as the ambassador of Mardonius, he spoke 
as follows:— 

“O men of Athens, these be the words of 
Mardonius. ‘The king has sent a message to 
me, saying, “All the trespasses which the 
Athenians have committed against me I freely 
forgive. Now then, Mardonius, thus shalt thou 
act towards them. Restore to them their terri¬ 
tory; and let them choose for themselves what¬ 
ever land they like besides, and let them dwell 
therein as a free people. Build up likewise all 
their temples which I burned, if on these terms 
they will consent to enter into a league with 
me.” Such are the orders which I have re¬ 
ceived, and which I must needs obey, unless 
there be a hindrance on your part. And now 
I say unto you,—why are ye so mad as to levy 
war against the king, whom ye cannot pos¬ 
sibly overcome, or even resist for ever.^ Ye 
have seen the multitude and the bravery of the 
host of Xerxes; ye know also how large a pow¬ 


er remains with me in your land; suppose then 
ye should get the better of us, and defeat this 
army—a thing whereof ye will not, if ye be 
wise, entertain the least hope—what follows 
even then but a contest with a still greater 
force Do not, because you would fain match 
yourselves with the king, consent to lose your 
country and live in constant danger of your 
lives. Rather agree to make peace; which ye 
can now do without any tarnish to your hon¬ 
our, since the king invites you to it. Continue 
free, and make an alliance with us, without 
fraud or deceit.’ 

(§ 2.) “These are the words, O Athenians! 
which Mardonius had bid me speak to you. 
For my own part, I will say nothing of the 
good will I bear your nation, since ye have not 
now for the first time to become acquainted 
with it. But I will add my intreaties also, and 
beseech you to give ear to Mardonius; for I see 
clearly that it is impossible for you to go on 
for ever contending against Xerxes. If that had 
appeared to me possible, I would not now have 
come hither the bearer of such a message. But 
the king’s power surpasses that of man, and his 
arm reaches far. If then ye do not hasten to 
conclude a peace, when such fair terms are 
offered you, I tremble to think of what you 
will have to endure—you, who of all the allies 
lie most directly in the path of danger, whose 
land will always be the chief battleground of 
the contending powers, and who will there¬ 
fore constantly have to suffer alone. Hearken 
then, I pray you, to Mardonius! Surely it is no 
small matter that the Great King chooses you 
out from all the rest of the Greeks, to offer you 
forgiveness of the wrongs you have done him, 
and to propose himself as your friend and 
ally!” 

141. Such were the words of Alexander. 
Now the Lacedaemonians, when tidings 
reached them that Alexander was gone to 
Athens to bring about a league between the 
Athenians and the barbarians, and when at 
the same time they called to mind the prophe¬ 
cies which declared that the Dorian race 
should one day be driven from the Pelopon- 
nese by the Medes and the Athenians, were ex¬ 
ceedingly afraid lest the Athenians might con¬ 
sent to the alliance with Persia. They there¬ 
fore lost no time in sending envoys to Athens; 
and it so happened that these envoys were giv¬ 
en their audience at the same time with Alex¬ 
ander: for the Athenians had waited and made 
delays, because they felt sure that the Lacedse- 
monians would hear that an ambassador was 




i^S-44l THE HISTORY 287 


come to them from the Persians, and as soon 
as they heard it would with all speed send an 
embassy. They contrived matters therefore of 
set purpose, so that the Lacedaemonians might 
hear them deliver their sentiments on the occa¬ 
sion. 

142. As soon as Alexander had finished 
speaking, the ambassadors from Sparta took 
the word and said,— 

“We are sent here by the Lacedaemonians to 
entreat of you that ye will not do a new thing 
in Greece, nor agree to the terms which are 
offered you by the barbarian. Such conduct on 
the part of any of the Greeks were alike unjust 
and dishonourable; but in you ’twould be 
worse than in others, for divers reasons. Twas 
by you that this war was kindled at the first 
among us—our wishes were in no way con¬ 
sidered; the contest began by your seeking to 
extend your empire—now the fate of Greece is 
involved in it. Besides it was surely an intoler¬ 
able thing that the Athenians, who have al¬ 
ways hitherto been known as a nation to which 
many men owed their freedom, should now be¬ 
come the means of bringing all other Greeks 
into slavery. We feel, however, for the heavy 
calamities which press on you—the loss of your 
harvest these two years, and the ruin in which 
your homes have lain for so long a time. We 
offer you, therefore, on the part of the Lacedic- 
monians and the allies, sustenance for your 
women and for the unwarlike portion of your 
households, so long as the war endures. Be ye 
not seduced by Alexander the Macedonian, 
who softens down the rough words of Mar- 
donius. He does as is natural for him to do— 
a tyrant himself, he helps forward a tyrant’s 
cause. But ye, Athenians, should do different¬ 
ly, at least if ye be truly wise; for ye should 
know that with barbarians there is neither 
faith nor truth.” 

143. Thus spake the envoys. After which 
the Athenians returned this answer to Alex¬ 
ander:— 

“We know, as well as thou dost, that the 
power of the Mede is many times greater than 
our own: we did not need to have that cast in 
our teeth. Nevertheless we cling so to freedom 
that we shall offer what resistance we may. 
Seek not to persuade us into making terms 
with the barbarian—say what thou wilt, thou 
wilt never gain our assent. Return rather at 
once, and tell Mardonius that our answer to 
him is this:—‘So long as the sun keeps his pres¬ 
ent course, we will never join alliance with 


Xerxes. Nay, we shall oppose him unceasingly, 
trusting in the aid of those gods and heroes 
whom he has lightly esteemed, whose houses 
and whose images he has burnt with fire.’ And 
come not thou again to us with words like 
these; nor, thinking to do us a service, per¬ 
suade us to unholy actions. Thou art the guest 
and friend of our nation—we would not that 
thou shouldst receive hurt at our hands.” 

144. Such was the answer which the Athe¬ 
nians gave to Alexander. To the Spartan en¬ 
voys they said:— 

“ ’Twas natural no doubt that the Lacedar- 
monians should be afraid we might make 
terms with the barbarian; but nevertheless 
’twas a base fear in men who knew so well of 
what temper and spirit we are. Not all the 
gold that the whole earth contains—not the 
fairest and most fertile of all lands—would 
bribe us to take part with the Medes and help 
them to enslave our countrymen. Even could 
we anyhow have brought ourselves to such a 
thing, there are many very p>owerful motives 
which would now make it impossible. The 
first and chief of these is the burning and de¬ 
struction of our temples and the images of our 
gods, which forces us to make no terms with 
their destroyer, but rather to pursue him with 
our resentment to the uttermost. Again, there 
is our common brotherhood with the Greeks: 
our common language, the altars and the sac¬ 
rifices of which we all partake, the common 
character which we bear—did the Athenians 
betray all these, of a truth it would not be well. 
Know then now, if ye have not known it be¬ 
fore, that while one Athenian remains alive, 
we will never join alliance with Xerxes. We 
thank you, however, for your forethought on 
our behalf, and for your wish to give our fam¬ 
ilies sustenance, now that ruin has fallen on 
us—the kindness is complete on your part; but 
for ourselves, we will endure as we may, and 
not be burdensome to you. Such then is our 
resolve. Be it your care with all speed to lead 
out your troops; for if we surmise aright, the 
barbarian will not wait long ere he invade our 
territory, but will set out so soon as he learns 
our answer to be, that we will do none of those 
things which he requires of us. Now then is 
the time for us, before he enters Attica, to go 
forth ourselves into Boeotia, and give him bat¬ 
tle.” 

When the Athenians had thus spoken, the 
ambassadors from Sparta departed, and re¬ 
turned back to their own country. 
