The Third Book, Entitled 
THALIA 




I. The above-mentioned Amasis was the Egyp¬ 
tian king against whom Cambyses, son of Cy¬ 
rus, made his expedition; and with him went 
an army composed of the many nations under 
his rule, among them being included both Io¬ 
nic and iTolic Greeks. The reason of the inva¬ 
sion was the following. Cambyses, by the ad¬ 
vice of a certain Egyptian, who was angry with 
Amasis for having torn him from his wife and 
children and given him over to the Persians, 
had sent a herald to Amasis to ask his daughter 
in marriage. His adviser was a physician, 
whom Amasis, when Cyrus had requested 
that he would send him the most skilful of all 
the Egyptian eye-doctors, singled out as the 
best from the whole number. Therefore the 
Egyptian bore Amasis a grudge, and his rea¬ 
son for urging Cambyses to ask the hand of 
the king’s daughter was, that if he complied, it 
might cause him annoyance; if he refused, it 
might make Cambyses his enemy. When the 
message came, Amasis, who much dreaded the 
power of the Persians, was greatly perplexed 
whether to give his daughter or no; for that 
Cambyses did not intend to make her his wife, 
but would only receive her as his concubine, he 
knew for certain. He therefore cast the matter 
in his mind, and finally resolved what he 
would do. There was a daughter of the late 
king Apries, named Nitetis, a tall and beautiful 
woman, the last survivor of that royal house. 
Amasis took this woman, and decking her 
out with gold and costly garments, sent her to 
Persia as if she had been his own child. Some 
time afterwards, Cambyses, as he gave her an 
embrace, happened to call her by her father’s 
name, whereupon she said to him, “I see, O 
king, thou knowest not how thou has been 
cheated by Amasis; who took me, and, trick¬ 
ing me out with gauds, sent me to thee as his 
own daughter. But I am in truth the child of 
Apries, who was his lord and master, until he 


rebelled against him, together with the rest of 
the Egyptians, and put him to death.” It was 
this speech, and the cause of quarrel it dis¬ 
closed, which roused the anger of Cambyses, 
son of Cyrus, and brought his arms upon 
Egypt. Such is the Persian story. 

2. The Egyptians, however, claim Cambyses 
as belonging to them, declaring that he was the 
son of this Nitetis. It was Cyrus, they say, and 
not Cambyses, who sent to Amasis for his 
daughter. But here they mis-state the truth. 
Acquainted as they are beyond all other men 
with the laws and customs of the Persians, they 
cannot but be well aware, first, that it is not 
the Persian wont to allow a bastard to reign 
when there is a legitimate heir; and next, that 
Cambyses was the son of Cassandane, the 
daughter of Pharnaspes, an Achaemenian, and 
not of this Egyptian. But the fact is that they 
pervert history in order to claim relationship 
with the house of Cyrus. Such is the truth of 
this matter. 

3. I have also heard another account, which 
I do not at all believe: that a Persian lady 
came to visit the wives of Cyrus, and seeing 
how tall and beautiful were the children of 
Cassandane, then standing by, broke out into 
loud praise of them, and admired them ex¬ 
ceedingly. But Cassandane, wife of Cyrus, an¬ 
swered, “Though such the children I have 
borne him, yet Cyrus slights me and gives all 
his regard to the new-comer from Egypt.” 
Thus did she express her vexation on account 
of Nitetis: whereupon Cambyses, the eldest of 
her boys, exclaimed, “Mother, when I am a 
man, I will turn Egypt upside down for you.” 
He was but ten years old, as the tale runs, when 
he said this, and astonished all the women, yet 
he never forgot it afterwards; and on this ac¬ 
count, they say, when he came to be a man, and 
mounted the throne, he made his expedition 
against Egypt. 


90 HERODOTUS [ Book iii 


4. There was another matter, quite distinct, 
which helped to bring about the expedition. 
One of the mercenaries of Amasis, a Halicar- 
nassian, Phanes by name, a man of good judg¬ 
ment, and a brave warrior, dissatisfied for 
some reason or other with his master, deserted 
the service, and taking ship, fled to Cambyses, 
wishing to get speech with him. As he was a 
person of no small account among the mercen¬ 
aries, and one who could give very exact in¬ 
telligence about Egypt, Amasis, anxious to re¬ 
cover him, ordered that he should be pursued. 
He gave the matter in charge to one of the 
most trusty of the eunuchs, who went in quest 
of the Halicarnassian in a vessel of war. The 
eunuch caught him in Lycia, but did not con¬ 
trive to bring him back to Egypt, for Phanes 
outwitted him by making his guards drunk, 
and then escaping into Persia. Now it hap¬ 
pened that Cambyses was meditating his at¬ 
tack on Egypt, and doubting how he might 
best pass the desert, when Phanes arrived, and 
not only told him all the secrets of Amasis, but 
advised him also how the desert might be 
crossed. He counselled him to send an ambas¬ 
sador to the king of the Arabs, and ask him 
for safe-conduct through the region. 

5. Now the only entrance into Egypt is by 
this desert: the country from Phoenicia to the 
borders of the city Cadytis belongs to the peo¬ 
ple called the Palaestine Syrians; from Cadytis, 
which it appears to me is a city almost as large 
as Sardis, the marts upon the coast till you 
reach Jenysus are the Arabian king’s; after 
Jenysus the Syrians again come in, and extend 
to Lake Serbonis, near the place where Mount 
Casius juts out into the sea. At Lake Serbonis, 
where the tale goes that Typhon hid himself, 
Egypt begins. Now the whole tract between 
Jenysus on the one side, and Lake Serbonis and 
Mount Casius on the other, and this is no small 
space, being as much as three days’ journey, is 
a dry desert without a drop of water. 

6. I shall now mention a thing of which few 
of those who sail to Egypt are aware. Twice a 
year wine is brought into Egypt from every 
part of Greece, as well as from Phcenicia, in 
earthen jars; and yet in the whole country you 
will nowhere see, as I may say, a single jar. 
What then, every one will ask, becomes of the 
jars.? This, too, I will clear up. The burgomas¬ 
ter of each town has to collect the wine-jars 
within his district, and to carry them to Mem¬ 
phis, where they are all filled with water by 
the Memphians, who then convey them to this 
desert tract of Syria. And so it comes to pass 


that all the jars which enter Egypt year by 
year, and are there put up to sale, find their 1 
way into Syria, whither all the old jars have 1 
gone before them. ' 

7. This way of keeping the passage into 
Egypt fit for use by storing water there, was 
begun by the Persians so soon as they became 
masters of that country. As, however, at the 
time of which we speak the tract had not yet 
been so supplied, Cambyses took the advice of 
his Halicarnassian guest, and sent messengers 1 
to the Arabian to beg a safe-conduct through 
the region. The Arabian granted his prayer, . 
and each pledged faith to the other. 

8. The Arabs keep such pledges more re- >' 

ligiously than almost any other people. They 1 
plight faith with the forms following. When . 
two men would swear a friendship, they stand j, 
on each side of a third: he with a sharp stone : 
makes a cut on the inside of the hand of each j 
near the middle finger, and, taking a piece 11 
from their dress, dips it in the blood of each, 
and moistens therewith seven stones lying in , 
the midst, calling the while on Bacchus and 
Urania. After this, the man who makes the 
pledge commends the stranger (or the citizen, j 
if citizen he be) to all his friends, and they 
deem, themselves bound to stand to the engage- > 
ment. They have but these two gods, to wit, l 
Bacchus and Urania; and they say that in their 
mode of cutting the hair, they follow Bacchus. I 
Now their practice is to cut it in a ring, away j 
from the temples. Bacchus they call in their j 
language Orotal, and Urania, Alilat. . 

9. When, therefore, the Arabian had pledged I 
his faith to the messengers of Cambyses, he [ 
straightway contrived as follows:—he filled a | 
number of camels’ skins with water, and load¬ 
ing therewith all the live camels that he pos¬ 
sessed, drove them into the desert, and awaited > 
the coming of the army. This is the more like¬ 
ly of the two tales that are told. The other is an 
improbable story, but, as it is related, I think 
that I ought not to pass it by. There is a great 
river in Arabia, called the Corys, which emp¬ 
ties itself into the Erythraean sea. The Arabian 
king, they say, made a pipe of the skins of 
oxen and other beasts, reaching from this river 
all the way to the desert, and so brought the 
water to certain cisterns which he had had dug 
in the desert to receive it. It is a twelve days’ 
journey from the river to this desert tract. And 
the water, they say, was brought through three 
different pipes to three separate places. 

10. Psammenitus, son of Amasis, lay en¬ 
camped at the mouth of the Nile, called the 






4-14 J 

Pelusiac, awaiting Cambyses. For Cambyses, 
when he went up against Egypt, found Amasis 
no longer in life: he had died after ruling 
Egypt forty and four years, during all which 
time no great misfortune had befallen him. 
When he died, his body was embalmed, and 
buried in the tomb which he had himself 
caused to be made in the temple. After his son 
Psammenitus had mounted the throne, a 
strange prodigy occurred in Egypt—rain fell 
at Egyptian Thebes, a thing which never hap¬ 
pened before, and which, to the present time, 
has never happened again, as the Thebans 
themselves testify. In Upper Egypt it does not 
usually rain at all; but on this occasion, rain 
fell at Thebes in small drops. 

11. The Persians crossed the desert, and, 
pitching their camp close to the Egyptians, 
made ready for battle. Hereupon the merce¬ 
naries in the pay of Psammenitus, who were 
Greeks and Carians, full of anger against 
Phanes for having brought a foreign army 
upon Egypt, bethought themselves of a mode 
whereby they might be revenged on him. 
Phanes had left sons in Egypt. The mercena¬ 
ries took these, and leading them to the camp, 
displayed them before the eyes of their father; 
after which they brought out a bowl, and, 
placing it in the space between the two hosts, 
they led the sons of Phanes, one by one, to the 
vessel, and slew them over it. When the last 
was dead, water and wine were poured into 
the. bowl, and all the soldiers tasted of the 
blood, and so they went to the battle. Stubborn 
was the hght which followed, and it was not 
till vast numbers had been slain upon both 
sides, that the Egyptians turned and fled. 

12. On the field where this battle was fought 
I saw a very wonderful thing which the natives 
pointed out to me. The bones of the slain lie 
scattered upon the field in two lots, those of 
the Persians in one place by themselves, as the 
bodies lay at the first—those of the Egyptians 
in another place apart from them. If, then, you 
strike the Persian skulls, even with a pebble, 
they are so weak, that you break a hole in 
them; but the Egyptian skulls are so strong, 
that you may smite them with a stone and you 
will scarcely break them in. They gave me the 
following reason for this difference, which 
seemed to me likely enough:—The Egyptians 
(they said) from early childhood have the 
head shaved, and so by the action of the sun 
the skull becomes thick and hard. The same 
cause prevents baldness in Egypt, where you 
see fewer bald men than in any other land. 


91 

Such, then, is the reason why the skulls of the 
Egyptians are so strong. The Persians, on the 
other hand, have feeble skulls, because they 
keep themselves shaded from the first, wearing 
turbans upon their heads. What I have here 
mentioned I saw with my own eyes, and I ob¬ 
served also the like at Papremis, in the case of 
the Persians who were killed with Achaemenes, 
the son of Darius, by Inarus the Libyan. 

13. The Egyptians who fought in the battle, 
no sooner turned their backs upon the enemy, 
than they fled away in complete disorder to 
Memphis, where they shut themselves up with¬ 
in the walls. Hereupon Cambyses sent a My- 
tilenaean vessel, with a Persian herald on board, 
who was to sail up the Nile to Memphis, and 
invite the Egyptians to a surrender. They, 
however, when they saw the vessel entering 
the town, poured forth in crowds from the 
castle, destroyed the ship, and, tearing the crew 
limb from limb, so bore them into the fortress. 
After this Memphis was besieged, and in due 
time surrendered. Hereon the Libyans wbo 
bordered upon Egypt, fearing the fate of that 
country, gave themselves up to Cambyses with¬ 
out a battle, made an agreement to pay tribute 
to him, and forthwith sent him gifts. The Cy- 
rensans too, and the Barcaeans, having the 
same fear as the Libyans, immediately did the 
like. Cambyses received the Libyan presents 
very graciously, but not so the gifts of the Cy- 
renaeans. They had sent no more than five hun¬ 
dred mina: of silver, which Cambyses, I im¬ 
agine, thought too little. He therefore snatched 
the money from them, and with his own hands 
scattered it among his soldiers. 

14. Ten days after the fort had fallen, Cam¬ 
byses resolved to try the spirit of Psammenitus, 
the Egyptian king, whose whole reign had 
been but six months. He therefore had him set 
in one of the suburbs, and many other Egyp¬ 
tians with him, and there subjected him to in¬ 
sult. First of all he sent his daughter out from 
the city, clothed in the garb of a slave, with a 
pitcher to draw water. Many virgins, the 
daughters of the chief nobles, accompanied 
her, wearing the same dress. When the damsels 
came opposite the place where their fathers 
sate, shedding tears and uttering cries of woe, 
the fathers, all but Psammenitus, wept and 
wailed in return, grieving to see their children 
in so sad a plight; but he, when he had looked 
and seen, bent his head towards the ground. 
In this way passed by the water-carriers. Next 
to them came Psammenitus’ son, and two thou¬ 
sand Egyptians of the same age with him—all 


THE HISTORY 


92 HERODOTUS Book iii 


of them having ropes round their necks and 
bridles in their mouths—and they too passed 
by on their way to suflFer death for the murder 
of the Mytilena^ans who were destroyed, with 
their vessel, in Memphis. For so had the royal 
judges given their sentence—“for each My- 
tilenaan ten of the noblest Egyptians must for¬ 
feit life.” King Psammenitus saw the train pass 
on, and knew his son was being led to death, 
but while the other Egyptians who sate 
around him wept and were sorely troubled, he 
showed no further sign than when he saw his 
daughter. And now, when they too were gone, 
it chanced that one of his former boon-com¬ 
panions, a man advanced in years, who had 
been stripped of all that he had and was a beg¬ 
gar, came where Psammenitus, son of Amasis, 
and the rest of the Egyptians were, asking alms 
from the soldiers. At this sight the king burst 
into tears, and weeping out aloud, called his 
friend by his name, and smote himself on the 
head. Now there were some who had been set 
to watch Psammenitus and see what he would 
do as each train went by; so these persons went 
and told Cambyses of his behaviour. Then he, 
astonished at what was done, sent a messenger 
to Psammenitus, and questioned him, saying, 
“Psammenitus, thy lord Cambyses asketh thee 
why, when thou sawest thy daughter brought 
to shame, and thy son on his way to death, 
thou didst neither utter cry nor shed tear, 
while to a beggar, who is, he hears, a stranger 
to thy race, thou gavest those marks of hon¬ 
our.” To this question Psammenitus made an¬ 
swer, “O son of Cyrus, my own misfortunes 
were too great for tears; but the woe of my 
friend deserved them. When a man falls from 
splendour and plenty into beggary at the thres¬ 
hold of old age, one may well weep for him.” 
When the messenger brought back this answer, 
Cambyses owned it was just; CrcEsus, likewise, 
the Egyptians say, burst into tears—for he too 
had come into Egypt with Cambyses—and the 
Persians who were present wept. Even Cam¬ 
byses himself was touched with pity, and he 
forthwith gave an order that the son of Psam¬ 
menitus should be spared from the number of 
those appointed to die, and Psammenitus him¬ 
self brought from the suburb into his presence. 

15. The messengers were too late to save the 
life of Psammenitus’ son, who had been cut 
in pieces the first of all; but they took Psam¬ 
menitus himself and brought him before the 
king. Cambyses allowed him to live with him, 
and gave him no more harsh treatment; nay, 
could he have kept from intermeddling with 


afiairs, he might have recovered Egypt, and 
ruled it as governor. For the Persian wont is to 
treat the sons of kings with honour, and even 
to give their fathers’ kingdoms to the children 
of such as revolt from them. There are many 
cases from which one may collect that this is 
the Persian rule, and especially those of Pau- 
siris and Thannyras. Thannyras was son of 
Inarus the Libyan, and was allowed to succeed 
his father, as was also Pausiris, son of Amyr- 
taeus; yet certainly no two persons ever did the 
Persians more damage than Amyrtaeus and 
Inarus. In this case Psammenitus plotted evil, 
and received his reward accordingly. He was 
discovered to be stirring up revolt in Egypt, 
wherefore Cambyses, when his guilt clearly 
appeared, compelled him to drink bull’s blood, 
which presently caused his death. Such was the 
end of Psammenitus. 

16. After this Cambyses left Memphis, and 
went to Sais, wishing to do that which he actu¬ 
ally did on his arrival there. He entered the 
palace of Amasis, and straightway commanded 
that the body of the king should be brought 
forth from the sepulchre. When the attendants 
did according to his commandment, he further 
bade them scourge the body, and prick it with 
goads, and pluck the hair from it,’ and heap 
upon it all manner of insults. The body, how¬ 
ever, having been embalmed, resisted, and re¬ 
fused to come apart, do what they would to it; 
so the attendants grew weary of their work; 
whereupon Cambyses bade them take the 
corpse and burn it. This was truly an impious 
command to give, for the Persians hold fire to 
be a god, and never by any chance burn their 
dead. Indeed this practice is unlawful, both 
with them and with the Egyptians—with them 
for the reason above mentioned, since they 
deem it wrong to give the corpse of a man to a 
god; and with the Egyptians, because they be¬ 
lieve fire to be a live animal, which eats what¬ 
ever it can seize, and then, glutted with the 
food, dies with the matter which it feeds upon. 
Now to give a man’s body to be devoured by 
beasts is in no wise agreeable to their customs, 
and indeed this is the very reason why they 
embalm their dead; namely, to prevent them 
from being eaten in the grave by worms. Thus 
Cambyses commanded what both nations ac¬ 
counted unlawful. According to the Egyptians, 

^ This is evidently a Greek statement, and not 
derived from the Egyptian priests. There was no 
hair to pluck out, the “head and all the body” of 
the kings and priests being shaved. The whole 
story may be doubted. 




i5'22 THE HISTORY 93 


it was not Amasis who was thus treated, but 
another of their nation who was of about the 
same height. The Persians, believing this man’s 
body to be the king’s, abused it in the fashion 
described above. Amasis, they say, was warned 
by an oracle of what would happen to him 
after his death: in order, therefore, to prevent 
the impending fate, he buried the body, which 
afterwards received the blows, inside his own 
tomb near the entrance, commanding his son 
to bury him, when he died, in the furthest re¬ 
cess of the same sepulchre. For my own part 
I do not believe that these orders were ever 
given by Amasis; the Egyptians, as it seems to 
me, falsely assert it, to save their own dignity. 

17. After this Cambyses took counsel with 
himself, and planned three expeditions. One 
was against the Carthaginians, another against 
the Ammonians, and a third against the long- 
lived Ethiopians, who dwelt in that part of 
Libya which borders upon the southern sea. 
He judged it best to despatch his fleet against 
Carthage and to send some portion of his land 
army to act against the Ammonians, while his 
spies went into Ethiopia, under the pretence of 
carrying presents to the king, but in reality to 
take note of all they saw, and especially to ob¬ 
serve whether there was really what is called 
“the table of the Sun” in Ethiopia. 

18. Now the table of the Sun according to 
the accounts given of it may be thus described: 
—It is a meadow in the skirts of their city full 
of the boiled flesh of all manner of beasts, 
which the magistrates are careful to store with 
meat every night, and where whoever likes 
may come and eat during the day. The people 
of the land say that the earth itself brings forth 
the food. Such is the description which is given 
of this table. 

19. When Cambyses had made up his mind 
that the spies should go, he forthwith sent to 
Elephantine for certain of the Icthyophagi who 
were acquainted with the Ethiopian tongue; 
and, while they were being fetched, issued or¬ 
ders to his fleet to sail against Carthage. But the 
Phoenicians said they would not go, since they 
were bound to the Carthaginians by solemn 
oaths, and since besides it would be wicked in 
them to make war on their own children. Now 
when the Phoenicians refused, the rest of the 
fleet was unequal to the undertaking; and so it 
was that the Carthaginians escaped, and were 
not enslaved by the Persians. Cambyses 
thought it not right to force the war upon the 
Phoenicians, because they had yielded them¬ 
selves to the Persians, and because upon the 


Phoenicians all his sea-service depended. The 
Cyprians had also joined the Persians of their 
own accord, and took part with them in the 
expedition against Egypt. 

20. As soon as the Icthyophagi arrived from 
Elephantine, Cambyses, having told them 
what they were to say, forthwith despatched 
them into Ethiopia with these following gifts: 
to wit, a purple robe, a gold chain for the neck, 
armlets, an alabaster box of myrrh, and a cask 
of palm wine. The Ethiopians to whom this 
embassy was sent are said to be the tallest and 
handsomest men in the whole world. In their 
customs they differ greatly from the rest of 
mankind, and particularly in the way they 
choose their kings; for they find out the man 
who is the tallest of all the citizens, and of 
strength equal to his height, and appoint him 
to rule over them. 

21. The Icthyophagi on reaching this peo¬ 
ple, delivered the gifts to the king of the coun¬ 
try, and spoke as follows:—“Cambyses, king 
of the Persians, anxious to become thy ally and 
sworn friend, has sent us to hold converse with 
thee, and to bear thee the gifts thou seest, 
which are the things wherein he himself de¬ 
lights the most.” Hereon the Ethiopian, who 
knew they came as spies, made answer:—“The 
king of the Persians sent you not with these 
gifts because he much desired to become my 
sworn friend—nor is the account which ye give 
of yourselves true, for ye are come to search 
out my kingdom. Also your king is not a just 
man—for were he so, he had not coveted a 
land which is not his own, nor brought slavery 
on a people who never did him any wrong. 
Bear him this bow, and say—‘The king of the 
Ethiops thus advises the king of the Persians 
—when the Persians can pull a bow of this 
strength thus easily, then let him come with 
an army of superior strength against the long- 
lived Ethiopians—till then, let him thank the 
gods that they have not put it into the heart of 
the sons of the Ethiops to covet countries 
which do not belong to them.’ ” 

22. So speaking, he unstrung the bow, and 
gave it into the hands of the messengers. Then, 
taking the purple robe, he asked them what it 
was, and how it had been made. They an¬ 
swered truly, telling him concerning the pur¬ 
ple, and the art of the dyer—whereat he ob¬ 
served “that the men were deceitful, and their 
garments also.” Next he took the neck-chain 
and the armlets, and asked about them. So the 
Icthyophagi explained their use as ornaments. 
Then the king laughed, and fancying they 


94 HERODOTUS [Book hi 


were fetters, said, “the Ethiopians had much 
stronger ones.” Thirdly, he inquired about the 
myrrh, and when they told him how it was 
made and rubbed upon the limbs, he said the 
same as he had said about the robe. Last of all 
he came to the wine, and having learnt their 
way of making it, he drank a draught, which 
greatly delighted him; whereupon he asked 
what the Persian king was wont to eat, and to 
what age the longest-lived of the Persians had 
been known to attain. They told him that the 
king ate bread, and described the nature of 
wheat—adding that eighty years was the 
longest term of man’s life among the Persians. 
Hereat he remarked, “It did not surprise him, 
if they fed on dirt, that they died so soon; in¬ 
deed he was sure they never would have lived 
so long as eighty years, except for the refresh¬ 
ment they got from that drink (meaning the 
wine), wherein he confessed the Persians sur¬ 
passed the Ethiopians.” 

23. The Icthyophagi then in their turn ques¬ 
tioned the king concerning the term of life, 
and diet of his people, and were told that most 
of them lived to be a hundred and twenty 
years old, while some even went beyond that 
age—they ate boiled flesh, and had for their 
drink nothing but milk. When the Icthyo¬ 
phagi showed wonder at the number of the 
years, he led them to a fountain, wherein when 
they had washed, they found their flesh all glos¬ 
sy and sleek, as if they had bathed in oil—and 
a scent came from the spring like that of vio¬ 
lets. The water was so weak, they said, that 
nothing would float in it, neither wood, nor 
any lighter substance, but all went to the bot¬ 
tom. If the account of this fountain be true, it 
would be their constant use of the water from 
it which makes them so long-lived. When they 
quitted the fountain the king led them to a 
prison, where the prisoners were all of them 
bound with fetters of gold. Among these Ethi¬ 
opians copper is of all metals the most scarce 
and valuable. After they had seen the prison, 
they were likewise shown what is called “the 
table of the Sun.” 

24. Also, last of all, they were allowed to 
behold the coffins of the Ethiopians, which are 
made (according to report) of crystal, after the 
following fashion:—When the dead body has 
been dried, either in the Egyptian, or in some 
other manner, they cover the whole with gyp¬ 
sum, and adorn it with painting until it is as 
like the living man as possible. Then they place 
the body in a crystal pillar which has been hol¬ 
lowed out to receive it, crystal being dug up 


in great abundance in their country, and of a 
kind very easy to work. You may see the corpse 
through the pillar within which it lies; and it 
neither gives out any unpleasant odour, nor is 
it in any respect unseemly; yet there is no part 
that is not as plainly visible as if the body were 
bare. The next of kin keep the crystal pillar in 
their houses for a full year from the time of 
the death, and give it the first fruits continual¬ 
ly, and honour it with sacrifice. After the year 
is out they bear the pillar forth, and set it up 
near the town. 

25. When the spies had now seen every¬ 
thing, they returned back to Egypt, and made 
report to Cambyses, who was stirred to anger 
by their words. Forthwith he set out on his 
march against the Ethiopians without having 
made any provision for the sustenance of his 
army, or reflected that he was about to wage 
war in the uttermost parts of the earth. Like a 
senseless madman as he was, no sooner did he 
receive the report of the Icthyophagi than he 
began his march, bidding the Greeks who 
were with his army remain where they were, 
and taking only his land force with him. At 
Thebes, which he passed through on his way, 
he detached from his main body some fifty 
thousand men, and sent them against the Am- 
monians with orders to carry the people into 
captivity, and burn the oracle of Jupiter. Mean¬ 
while he himself went on with the rest of his 
forces against the Ethiopians. Before, however, 
he had accomplished one-fifth part of the dis¬ 
tance, all that the army had in the way of pro¬ 
visions failed; whereupon the men began to eat 
the Sumpter beasts, which shortly failed also. 
If then, at this time, Cambyses, seeing what 
was happening, had confessed himself in the 
wrong, and led his army back, he would have 
done the wisest thing that he could after the 
mistake made at the outset; but as it was, he 
took no manner of heed, but continued to 
march forwards. So long as the earth gave 
them anything, the soldiers sustained life by 
eating the grass and herbs; but when they 
came to the bare sand, a portion of them were 
guilty of a horrid deed: by tens they cast lots 
for a man, who was slain to be the food of the 
others. When Cambyses heard of these doings, 
alarmed at such cannibalism, he gave up his 
attack on Ethiopia, and retreating by the way 
he had come, reached Thebes, after he had lost 
vast numbers of his soldiers. From Thebes he 
marched down to Memphis, where he dis¬ 
missed the Greeks, allowing them to sail home. 
And so ended the expedition against Ethiopia. 




THE HISTORY 95 


26. The men sent to attack the Ammonians, 
started from Thebes, having guides with them, 
and may be clearly traced as far as the city 
Oasis, which is inhabited by Samians, said to 
be of the tribe ^Tschrionia. The place is distant 
from Thebes seven days’ journey across the 
sand, and is called in our tongue “the Island of 
the Blessed.” Thus far the army is known to 
have made its way; but thenceforth nothing is 
to be heard of them, except what the Ammo¬ 
nians, and those who get their knowledge from 
them, report. It is certain they neither reached 
the Ammonians, nor even came back to Egypt. 
Further than this, the Ammonians relate as 
follows:—That the Persians set forth from Oa¬ 
sis across the sand, and had reached about half 
way between that place and themselves when, 
as they were at their midday meal, a wind 
arose from the south, strong and deadly, bring¬ 
ing with it vast columns of whirling sand, 
which entirely covered up the troops and 
caused them wholly to disappear. Thus, ac¬ 
cording to the Ammonians, did it fare with 
this army. 

27. About the time when Cambyses arrived 
at Memphis, Apis appeared to the Egyptians. 
Now Apis is the god whom the Greeks call 
Epaphus. As soon as he appeared, straightway 
all the Egyptians arrayed themselves in their 
gayest garments, and fell to feasting and jolli¬ 
ty: which when Cambyses saw, making sure 
that these rejoicings were on account of his 
own ill success, he called before him the officers 
who had charge of Memphis, and demanded of 
them—“Why, when he was in Memphis be¬ 
fore, the Egyptians had done nothing of this 
kind, but waited until now, when he had re¬ 
turned with the loss of so many of his troops.^” 
The officers made answer, “That one of their 
gods had appeared to them, a god who at long 
intervals of time had been accustomed to show 
himself in Egypt—and that always on his ap¬ 
pearance the whole of Egypt feasted and kept 
jubilee.” When Cambyses heard this, he told 
them that they lied, and as liars he condemned 
them all to suffer death. 

28. When they were dead, he called the 
priests to his presence, and questioning them 
received the same answer; whereupon he ob¬ 
served, “That he would soon know whether a 
tame god had really come to dwell in Egypt” 
—and straightway, without another word, he 
bade them bring Apis to him. So they went out 
from his presence to fetch the god. Now this 
Apis, or Epaphus, is the calf of a cow which is 
never afterwards able to bear young. The 


Egyptians say that fire comes down from heav¬ 
en upon the cow, which thereupon conceives 
Apis. The calf which is so called has the fol¬ 
lowing marks:—He is black, with a square 
spot of white upon his forehead, and on his 
back the figure of an eagle; the hairs in his tail 
are double, and there is a beetle upon his 
tongue. 

29. When the priests returned bringing Apis 
with them, Cambyses, like the harebrained 
person that he was, drew his dagger, and 
aimed at the belly of the animal, but missed 
his mark, and stabbed him in the thigh. Then 
he laughed, and said thus to the priests:—“Oh! 
blockheads, and think ye that gods become 
like this, of flesh and blood, and sensible to 
steel A fit god indeed for Egyptians, such an 
one! But it shall cost you dear that you have 
made me your laughing-stock.” When he had 
so spoken, he ordered those whose business it 
was to scourge the priests, and if they found 
any of the Egyptians keeping festival to put 
them to death. Thus was the feast stopped 
throughout the land of Egypt, and the priests 
suffered punishment. Apis, wounded in the 
thigh, lay some time pining in the temple; at 
last he died of his wound, and the priests bur¬ 
ied him secretly without the knowledge of 
Cambyses. 

30. And now Cambyses, who even before 
had not been quite in his right mind, was 
forthwith, as the Egyptians say, smitten with 
madness for this crime. The first of his out¬ 
rages was the slaying of Smerdis, his full broth¬ 
er, whom he had sent back to Persia from 
Egypt out of envy, because he drew the bow 
brought from the Ethiopians by the Icthyo- 
phagi (which none of the other Persians were 
able to bend) the distance of two fingers’ 
breadth. When Smerdis was departed into 
Persia, Cambyses had a vision in his sleep—he 
thought a messenger from Persia came to him 
with tidings that Smerdis sat upon the royal 
throne and with his head touched the heav¬ 
ens. Fearing therefore for himself, and think¬ 
ing it likely that his brother would kill him 
and rule in his stead, Cambyses sent into Per¬ 
sia Prexaspes, whom he trusted beyond all the 
other Persians, bidding him put Smerdis to 
death. So this Prexaspes went up to Susa and 
slew Smerdis. Some say he killed him as they 
hunted together, others, that he took him 
down to the Erythraean Sea, and there drowned 
him. 

31. This, it is said, was the first outrage 
which Cambyses committed. The second was 


96 HERODOTUS [Bookiii 


the slaying of his sister, who had accompanied 
him into Egypt, and lived with him as his wife, 
though she was his full sister, the daughter 
both of his father and his mother. The way 
wherein he had made her his wife was the fol¬ 
lowing:—It was not the custom of the Per¬ 
sians, before his time, to marry their sisters— 
but Cambyses, happening to fall in love with 
one of his and wishing to take her to wife, as 
he knew that it was an uncommon thing, called 
together the royal judges, and put it to them, 
“whether there was any law which allowed a 
brother, if he wished, to marry his sister.^” 
Now the royal judges are certain picked men 
among the Persians, who hold their office for 
life, or until they are found guilty of some mis¬ 
conduct. By them justice is administered in 
Persia, and they are the interpreters of the old 
laws, all disputes being referred to their deci¬ 
sion. When Cambyses, therefore, put his ques¬ 
tion to these judges, they gave him an answer 
which was at once true and safe—“they did not 
find any law,” they said, “allowing a brother 
to take his sister to wife, but they found a law, 
that the king of the Persians might do what¬ 
ever he pleased.” And so they neither warped 
the law through fear of Cambyses, nor ruined 
themselves by over stiffly maintaining the law; 
but they brought another quite distinct law to 
the king’s help, which allowed him to have his 
wish. Cambyses, therefore, married the object 
of his love, and no long time afterwards he 
took to wife another sister. It was the younge.r 
of these who went with him into Egypt, and 
there suffered death at his hands. 

32. Concerning the manner of her death, as 
concerning that of Smerdis, two different ac¬ 
counts are given. The story which the Greeks 
tell is that Cambyses had set a young dog to 
fight the cub of a lioness—his wife looking on 
at the time. Now the dog was getting the 
worse, when a pup of the same litter broke his 
chain, and came to his brother’s aid—then the 
two dogs together fought the lion, and con¬ 
quered him. The thing greatly pleased Cam- 
byses, but his sister who was sitting by shed 
tears. When Cambyses saw this, he asked her 
why she wept: whereon she told him, that see¬ 
ing the young dog come to his brother’s aid 
made her think of Smerdis, whom there was 
none to help. For this speech, the Greeks say, 
Cambyses put her to death. But the Egyptians 
tell the story thus:—The two were sitting at 
table, when the sister took a lettuce, and strip¬ 
ping the leaves off, asked her brother “when 
he thought the lettuce looked the prettiest— 


when it had all its leaves on, or now that it was 
stripped.^” He answered, “When the leaves 
were on.” “But thou,” she rejoined, “hast done 
as I did to the lettuce, and made bare the house 
of Cyrus.” Then Cambyses was wroth, and 
sprang fiercely upon her, though she was with 
child at the time. And so it came to pass that 
she miscarried and died. 

33. Thus mad was Cambyses upon his own 
kindred, and this either from his usage of Apis, 
or from some other among the many causes 
from which calamities are wont to arise. They 
say that from his birth he was afflicted with a 
dreadful disease, the disorder which some call 
“the sacred sickness.”^ It would be by no 
means strange, therefore, if his mind were af¬ 
fected in some degree, seeing that his body la¬ 
boured under so sore a malady. 

34. He was mad also upon others besides his 
kindred; among the rest, upon Prexaspes, the 
man whom he esteemed beyond all the rest of 
the Persians, who carried his messages, and 
whose son held the office—an honour of no 
small account in Persia—of his cupbearer. 
Him Cambyses is said to have once addressed 
as follows:—“What sort of man, Prexaspes, do 
the Persians think me.^ What do they say of 
me.^” Prexaspes answered, “Oh! sire, they 
praise thee greatly in all things but one—they 
say thou art too much given to love of wine.” 
Such Prexaspes told him was the judgment of 
the Persians; whereupon Cambyses, full of 
rage, made answer, “What? they say now that 
I drink too much wine, and so have lost my 
senses, and am gone out of my mind! Then 
their former speeches about me were untrue.” 
For once, when the Persians were sitting with 
him, and CrcEsus was by, he had asked them, 
“What sort of man they thought him com¬ 
pared to his father Cyrus?” Hereon they had 
answered, “That he surpassed his father, for he 
was lord of all that his father ever ruled, and 
further had made himself master of Egypt, 
and the sea.” Then Croesus, who was standing 
near, and misliked the comparison, spoke thus 
to Cambyses: “In my judgment, O son of Cy¬ 
rus, thou art not equal to thy father, for thou 
hast not yet left behind thee such a son as he.” 
Cambyses was delighted when he heard this 
reply, and praised the judgment of Croesus. 

35. Recollecting these answers, Cambyses 
spoke fiercely to Prexaspes, saying, “Judge now 
thyself, Prexaspes, whether the Persians tell 
the truth, or whether it is not they who are 
mad for speaking as they do. Look there now 

^ Epilepsy. 




32-38] THE HISTORY 97 


at thy son standing in the vestibule—if I shoot 
and hit him right in the middle of the heart, 
it will be plain the Persians have no grounds 
for what they say: if I miss him, then I allow 
that the Persians are right, and that I am out 
of my mind.” So speaking he drew his bow to 
the full, and struck the boy, who straightway 
fell down dead. Then Cambyses ordered the 
body to be opened, and the wound examined; 
and when the arrow was found to have entered 
the heart, the king was quite overjoyed, and 
said to the father with a laugh, “Now thou 
seest plainly, Prexaspes, that it is not I who am 
mad, but the Persians who have lost their 
senses. I pray thee tell me, sawest thou ever 
mortal man send an arrow with a better aim?” 
Prexaspes, seeing that the king was not in his 
right mind, and fearing for himself, replied, 
“Oh! my lord, I do not think that God himself 
could shoot so dexterously.” Such was the out¬ 
rage which Cambyses committed at this time: 
at another, he took twelve of the noblest Per¬ 
sians, and, without bringing any charge wor¬ 
thy of death against them, buried them all up 
to the neck. 

36. Hereupon Croesus the Lydian thought 
it right to admonish Cambyses, which he did 
in these words following:—“Oh! king, allow 
not thyself to give way entirely to thy youth, 
and the heat of thy temper, but check and con¬ 
trol thyself. It is well to look to consequences, 
and in forethought is true wisdom. Thou lay- 
est hold of men, who are thy fellow-citizens, 
and, without cause of complaint, slayest them 
—thou even puttest children to death—bethink 
thee now, if thou shalt often do things like 
these, will not the Persians rise in revolt against 
thee? It is by thy father’s wish that I oRer thee 
advice; he charged me strictly to give thee 
such counsel as I might see to be most for thy 
good.” In thus advising Cambyses, Croesus 
meant nothing but what was friendly. But 
Cambyses answered him, “Dost thou presume 
to offer me advice? Right well thou ruledst 
thy own country when thou wert a king, and 
right sage advice thou gavest my father Cyrus, 
bidding him cross the Araxes and fight the 
Massagetae in their own land, when they were 
willing to have passed over into ours. By thy 
misdirection of thine own affairs thou brought- 
est ruin upon thyself, and by thy bad counsel, 
which he followed, thou broughtest ruin upon 
Cyrus, my father. But thou shalt not escape 
punishment now, for I have long been seeking 
to find some occasion against thee.” As he thus 
spoke, Cambyses took up his bow to shoot at 


Croesus; but Croesus ran hastily out, and es¬ 
caped. So when Cambyses found that he could 
not kill him with his bow, he bade his servants 
seize him, and put him to death. The servants, 
however, who knew their master’s humour, 
thought it best to hide Croesus; that so, if Cam¬ 
byses relented, and asked for him, they might 
bring him out, and get a reward for having 
saved his life—if, on the other hand, he did not 
relent, or regret the loss, they might then des¬ 
patch him. Not long afterwards, Cambyses did 
in fact regret the loss of Croesus, and the serv¬ 
ants, perceiving it, let him know that he was 
still alive. “I am glad,” said he, “that Croesus 
lives, but as for you who saved him, ye shall 
not escape my vengeance, but shall all of you 
he put to death.” And he did even as he had 
said. 

37. Many other wild outrages of this sort 
did Cambyses commit, both upon the Persians 
and the allies, while he still stayed at Memphis; 
among the rest he opened the ancient sepul¬ 
chres, and examined the bodies that were bur¬ 
ied in them. He likewise went into the temple 
of Vulcan, and made great sport of the image. 
For the image of Vulcan is very like the 
Pataeci of the Phoenicians, wherewith they orna¬ 
ment the prows of their ships of war. If per¬ 
sons have not seen these, I will explain in a 
different way—it is a figure resembling that of 
a pigmy. He went also into the temple of the 
Cabiri, which it is unlawful for any one to en¬ 
ter except the priests, and not only made sport 
of the images, but even burnt them. They are 
made like the statue of Vulcan, who is said to 
have been their father. 

38. Thus it appears certain to me, by a great 
variety of proofs, that Cambyses was raving 
mad; he would not else have set himself to 
make a mock of holy rites and long-established 
usages. For if one were to offer men to choose 
out of all the customs in the world such as 
seemed to them the best, they would examine 
the whole number, and end by preferring their 
own; so convinced are they that their own us¬ 
ages far surpass those of all others. Unless, 
therefore, a man was mad, it is not likely that 
he would make sport of such matters. That 
people have this feeling about their laws may 
be seen by very many proofs: among others, by 
the following. Darius, after he had got the 
kingdom, called into his presence certain 
Greeks who were at hand, and asked—“What 
he should pay them to eat the bodies of their 
fathers when they died?” To which they an¬ 
swered, that there was no sum that would 


98 HERODOTUS [Book iii 


tempt them to do such a thing. He then sent 
for certain Indians, of the race called Callati- 
ans, men who eat their fathers, and asked 
them, while the Greeks stood by, and knew 
by the help of an interpreter all that was said 
—“What he should give them to burn the bod¬ 
ies of their fathers at their decease.^” The In¬ 
dians exclaimed aloud, and bade him forbear 
such language. Such is men’s wont herein; and 
Pindar was right, in my judgment, when he 
said, “Law is the king o’er all.” 

39. While Cambyses was carrying on this 
war in Egypt, the Lacedaemonians likewise 
sent a force to Samos against Polycrates, the 
son of iTaces, who had by insurrection made 
himself master of that island. At the outset he 
divided the state into three parts, and shared 
the kingdom with his brothers, Pantagnotus 
and Syloson; but later, having killed the for¬ 
mer and banished the latter, who was the 
younger of the two, he held the whole island. 
Hereupon he made a contract of friendship 
with Amasis the Egyptian king, sending him 
gifts, and receiving from him others in return. 
In a little while his power so greatly increased, 
that the fame of it went abroad throughout Io¬ 
nia and the rest of Greece. Wherever he turned 
his arms, success waited on him. He had a fleet 
of a hundred penteconters, and bowmen to the 
number of a thousand. Herewith he plundered 
all, without distinction of friend or foe; for he 
argued that a friend was better pleased if you 
gave him back what you had taken from him, 
than if you spared him at the first. He cap¬ 
tured many of the islands, and several towns 
upon the mainland. Among his other doings 
he overcame the Lesbians in a sea-fight, when 
they came with all their forces to the help of 
Miletus, and m.ade a number of them prison¬ 
ers. These persons, laden with fetters, dug the 
moat which surrounds the castle at Samos. 

40. The exceeding good fortune of Poly¬ 
crates did not escape the notice of Amasis, who 
was much disturbed thereat. When therefore 
his successes continued increasing, Amasis 
wrote him the following letter, and sent it to 
Samos. “Amasis to Polycrates thus sayeth: It 
is a pleasure to hear of a friend and ally pros¬ 
pering, but thy exceeding prosperity does not 
cause me joy, forasmuch as I know that the gods 
are envious. My wish for myself and for those 
whom I love is to be now successful, and now 
to meet with a check; thus passing through life 
amid alternate good and ill, rather than with 
perpetual good fortune. For never yet did I 
hear tell of any one succeeding in all his under¬ 


takings, who did not meet with calamity at 1 
last, and come to utter ruin. Now, therefore, ^ 

give ear to my words, and meet thy good luck j 

in this way: bethink thee which of all thy treas¬ 
ures thou valuest most and canst least bear to 
part with; take it, whatsoever it be, and throw 
it away, so that it may be sure never to come 
any more into the sight of man. Then, if thy 
good fortune be not thenceforth chequered 
with ill, save thyself from harm by again doing 
as I have counselled.” 

41. When Polycrates read this letter, and 
perceived that the advice of Amasis was good, 
he considered carefully with himself which of 
the treasures that he had in store it would 
grieve him most to lose. After much thought * 
he made up his mind that it was a signet-ring 
which he was wont to wear, an emerald set in 
gold, the workmanship of Theodore, son of | 
Telecles, a Samian. So he determined to throw 1 
this away; and, manning a penteconter, he 
went on board, and bade the sailors put out , 
into the open sea. When he was now a long i 
way from the island, he took the ring from his 
finger, and, in the sight of all those who were | 
on board, flung it into the deep. This done, he 1 
returned home, and gave vent to his sorrow. 1 

42. Now it happened five or six days after- | 
wards that a fisherman caught a fish so large 1 
and beautiful that he thought it well deserved I 
to be made a present of to the king. So he took 

it with him to the gate of the palace, and said 
that he wanted to see Polycrates. Then Poly¬ 
crates allowed him to come in, and the fisher- ' 
man gave him the fish with these words fol- | 
lowing—“Sir king, when I took this prize, I 
thought I would not carry it to market, though 
I am a poor man who live by my trade. I said 
to myself, it is worthy of Polycrates and his 
greatness; and so I brought it here to give it to 
you.” The speech pleased the king, who thus 
spoke in reply:—“Thou didst right well, 
friend, and I am doubly indebted, both for the 
gift, and for the speech. Come now, and sup 
with me.” So the fisherman went home, es- • 
teeming it a high honour that he had been 
asked to sup with the king. Meanwhile the 
servants, on cutting open the fish, found the 
signet of their master in its belly. No sooner 
did they see it than they seized upon it, and 
hastening to Polycrates with great joy, restored 
it to him, and told him in what way it had 
been found. The king, who saw something 
providential in the matter, forthwith wrote a 
letter to Amasis, telling him all that had hap¬ 
pened, what he had himself done, and what 





39-48] THE HISTORY 99 


had been the upshot—and despatched the let¬ 
ter to Egypt. 

43. When Amasis had read the letter of 
Polycrates, he perceived that it does not belong 
to man to save his fellow-man from the fate 
which is in store for him; likewise he felt cer¬ 
tain that Polycrates would end ill, as he pros¬ 
pered in everything, even finding what he had 
thrown away. So he sent a herald to Samos, 
and dissolved the contract of friendship. This 
he did, that when the great and heavy mis¬ 
fortune came, he might escape the grief which 
he would have felt if the sufferer had been his 
bond-friend. 

44. It was with this Polycrates, so fortunate 
in every undertaking, that the Lacedaemonians 
now went to war. Certain Samians, the same 
who afterwards founded the city of Cydonia 
in Crete, had earnestly intreated their help. 
For Polycrates, at the time when Cambyses, 
son of Cyrus, was gathering together an arma¬ 
ment against Egypt, had sent to beg him not 
to omit to ask aid from Samos; whereupon 
Cambyses with much readiness despatched a 
messenger to the island, and made request that 
Polycrates would give some ships to the naval 
force which he was collecting against Egypt. 
Polycrates straightway picked out from among 
the citizens such as he thought most likely to 
stir revolt against him, and manned with them 
forty triremes, which he sent to Cambyses, bid¬ 
ding him keep the men safe, and never allow 
them to return home. 

45. Now some accounts say that these Sa¬ 
mians did not reach Egypt; for that when they 
were off Carpathus, they took counsel together 
and resolved to sail no further. But others 
maintain that they did go to Egypt, and, find¬ 
ing themselves watched, deserted, and sailed 
back to Samos. There Polycrates went out 
against them with his fleet, and a battle was 
fought and gained by the exiles; after which 
they disembarked upon the island and engaged 
the land forces of Polycrates, but were defeated, 
and so sailed off to Lacedxmon. Some relate 
that the Samians from Egypt overcame Poly¬ 
crates, but it seems to me untruly; for had the 
Samians been strong enough to conquer Poly¬ 
crates by themselves, they would not have 
needed to call in the aid of the Lacedaemo¬ 
nians. And moreover, it is not likely that a 
king who had in his pay so large a body of for¬ 
eign mercenaries, and maintained likewise 
such a force of native bowmen, would have 
been worsted by an army so small as that of the 
returned Samians. As for his own subjects, to 


hinder them from betraying him and joining 
the exiles. Polycrates shut up their wives and 
children in the sheds built to shelter his ships, 
and was ready to burn sheds and all in case of 
need. 

46. When the banished Samians reached 
Sparta, they had audience of the magistrates, 
before whom they made a long speech, as was 
natural with persons greatly in want of aid. 
Accordingly at this first sitting the Spartans 
answered them that they had forgotten the 
first half of their speech, and could make noth¬ 
ing of the remainder. Afterwards the Samians 
had another audience, whereat they simply 
said, showing a bag which they had brought 
with them, “The bag wants flour.” The Spar¬ 
tans answered that they did not need to have 
said “the bag”; however, they resolved to give 
them aid. 

47. Then the Lacedaemonians made ready 
and set forth to the attack of Samos, from a 
motive of gratitude, if we may believe the 
Samians, because the Samians had once sent 
ships to their aid against the Messenians; but 
as the Spartans themselves say, not so much 
from any wish to assist the Samians who beg¬ 
ged their help, as from a desire to punish the 
people who had seized the bowl which they 
sent to Croesus, and the corselet which Amasis, 
king of Egypt, sent as a present to them. The 
Samians made prize of this corselet the year 
before they took the bowl—it was of linen, and 
had a vast number of figures of animals in- 
woven into its fabric, and was likewise em¬ 
broidered with gold and tree-wool. What is 
most worthy of admiration in it is that each 
of the twists, although of fine texture, contains 
within it three hundred and sixty threads, all 
of them clearly visible. The corselet which Am¬ 
asis gave to the temple of Minerva in Lindus 
is just such another. 

48. The Corinthians likewise right willing¬ 
ly lent a helping hand towards the expedition 
against Samos; for a generation earlier, about 
the time of the seizure of the wine-bowl, they 
too had suffered insult at the hands of the Sa¬ 
mians. It happened that Periander, son of 
Cypselus, had taken three hundred boys, chil¬ 
dren of the chief nobles among the Cor- 
cyrseans, and sent them to Alyattes for eu¬ 
nuchs; the men who had them in charge 
touched at Samos on their way to Sardis; 
whereupon the Samians, having found out 
what was to become of the boys when they 
reached that city, first prompted them to take 
sanctuary at the temple of Diana; and after 


100 HERODOTUS [Book hi 


this, when the Corinthians, as they were for¬ 
bidden to tear the suppliants from the holy 
place, sought to cut of! from them all supplies 
of food, invented a festival in their behalf, 
which they celebrate to this day with the self¬ 
same rites. Each evening, as night closed in, 
during the whole time that the boys continued 
there, choirs of youths and virgins were placed 
about the temple, carrying in their hands cakes 
made of sesame and honey, in order that the 
Corcyrxan boys might snatch the cakes, and so 
get enough to live upon. 

49. And this went on for so long, that at last 
the Corinthians who had charge of the boys 
gave them up, and took their departure, upon 
which the Samians conveyed them back to 
Corcyra. If now, after the death of Periander, 
the Corinthians and Corcyracans had been good 
friends, it is not to be imagined that the former 
would ever have taken part in the expedition 
against Samos for such a reason as this; but as, 
in fact, the two people have always, ever since 
the first settlement of the island, been enemies 
to one another, this outrage was remembered, 
and the Corinthians hore the Samians a grudge 
for it. Periander had chosen the youths from 
among the first families in Corcyra, and sent 
them a present to Alyattes, to avenge a wrong 
which he had received. For it was the Cor- 
cyraeans who began the quarrel and injured 
Periander by an outrage of a horrid nature. 

50. After Periander had put to death his 
wife Melissa, it chanced that on this first afflic¬ 
tion a second followed of a difierent kind. His 
wife had borne him two sons, and one of them 
had now reached the age of seventeen, the 
other of eighteen years, when their mother’s 
father, Procles, tyrant of Epidaurus, asked 
them to his court. They went, and Procles 
treated them with much kindness, as was nat¬ 
ural, considering they were his own daughter’s 
children. At length, when the time for parting 
came, Procles, as he was sending them on their 
way, said, “Know you now, my children, who 
it was that caused your mother’s death The 
elder son took no account of this speech, but 
the younger, whose name was Lycophron, was 
sorely troubled at it—so much so, that when he 
got back to Corinth, looking upon his father 
as his mother’s murderer, he would neither 
speak to him, nor answer when spoken to, nor 
utter a word in reply to all his questionings. So 
Periander at last, growing furious at such be¬ 
haviour, banished him from his house. 

51. The younger son gone, he turned to the 
elder and asked him, “what it was that their 


grandfather had said to them.^” Then he re¬ 
lated in how kind and friendly a fashion he 
had received them; but, not having taken any 
notice of the speech which Procles had uttered 
at parting, he quite forgot to mention it. Peri¬ 
ander insisted that it was not possible this 
should be all—their grandfather must have 
given them some hint or other—and he went 
on pressing him, till at last the lad remembered 
the parting speech and told it. Periander, after i 
he had turned the whole matter over in his 1 
thoughts, and felt unwilling to give way at all, 
sent a messenger to the persons who had 
opened their houses to his outcast son, and for¬ 
bade them to harbour him. Then the boy, when ' 
he was chased from one friend, sought refuge ' 
with another, but was driven from shelter to 
shelter by the threats of his father, who men¬ 
aced all those that took him in, and command¬ 
ed them to shut their doors against him. Still, as 
fast as he was forced to leave one house he went 
to another, and was received by the inmates; for 
his acquaintance, although in no small alarm, 1 
yet gave him shelter, as he was Periander’s son. 

52. At last Periander made proclamation 
that whoever harboured his son or even spoke 
to him, should forfeit a certain sum of money 
to Apollo. On hearing this no one any longer 
liked to take him in, or even to hold converse 1 
with him, and he himself did not think it right 
to seek to do what was forbidden; so, abiding 
by his resolve, he made his lodging in the pub- j 
lie porticos. When four days had passed in this , 
way, Periander, seeing how wretched his son I 
was, that he neither washed nor took any food, | 
felt moved with compassion towards him; 
wherefore, foregoing his anger, he approached 
him, and said, “Which is better, oh! my son, to 
fare as now thou farest, or to receive my crown 1 
and all the good things that I possess, on the I 
one condition of submitting thyself to thy fa¬ 
ther.^ See, now, though my own child, and 
lord of this wealthy Corinth, thou hast brought ' 
thyself to a beggar’s life, because thou must re¬ 
sist and treat with anger him whom it least be- 1 
hoves thee to oppose. If there has been a calam¬ 
ity, and thou bearest me ill will on that ac¬ 
count, bethink thee that I too feel it, and am 
the greatest sufferer, in as much as it was by 
me that the deed was done. For thyself, now 1 
that thou knowest how much better a thing it 
is to be envied than pitied, and how dangerous | 
it is to indulge anger against parents and su¬ 
periors, come back with me to thy home.” 
With such words as these did Periander chide 
his son; but the son made no reply, except to re- 






49-57] THE HISTORY 101 


mind his father that he was indebted to the 
god in the penalty for coming and holding con¬ 
verse with him. Then Periander knew that 
there was no cure for the youth’s malady, nor 
means of overcoming it; so he prepared a ship 
and sent him away out of his sight to Corcyra, 
which island at that time belonged to him. As 
for Procles, Periander, regarding him as the 
true author of all his present troubles, went to 
war with him as soon as his son was gone, and 
not only made himself master of his kingdom 
Epidaurus, but also took Procles himself, and 
carried him into captivity. 

53. As time went on, and Periander came to 
be old, he found himself no longer equal to the 
oversight and management of affairs. Seeing, 
therefore, in his eldest son no manner of abil¬ 
ity, but knowing him to be dull and blockish, 
he sent to Corcyra and recalled Lycophron to 
take the kingdom. Lycophron, however, did 
not even deign to ask the bearer of this mes¬ 
sage a question. But Periander’s heart was set 
upon the youth, so he sent again to him, this 
time by his own daughter, the sister of Lyco¬ 
phron, who would, he thought, have more 
power to persuade him than any other person. 
Then she, when she reached Corcyra, spoke 
thus with her brother:—“Dost thou wish the 
kingdom, brother, to pass into strange hands, 
and our father’s wealth to be made a prey, 
rather than thyself return to enjoy it? Come 
back home with me, and cease to punish thy¬ 
self. It is scant gain, this obstinacy. Why seek 
to cure evil by evil? Mercy, remember, is by 
many set above justice. Many, also, while push¬ 
ing their mother’s claims have forfeited their 
father’s fortune. Power is a slippery thing—it 
has many suitors; and he is old and stricken in 
years—let not thy own inheritance go to anoth¬ 
er.” Thus did the sister, who had been tutored 
by Periander what to say, urge all the argu¬ 
ments most likely to have weight with her 
I brother. He however made answer, “That so 
I long as he knew his father to be still alive, he 
1 would never go back to Corinth.” When the 
[ sister brought Periander this reply, he sent to his 
son a third time by a herald, and said he would 
come himself to Corcyra, and let his son take 
his place at Corinth as heir to his kingdom. To 
these terms Lycophron agreed; and Periander 
was making ready to pass into Corcyra and his 
son to return to Corinth, when the Corcyrae- 
ans, being informed of what was taking place, 
to keep Periander away, put the young man to 
death. For this reason it was that Periander 
i, took vengeance on the Corcyraeans. 


54. The Lacedaemonians arrived before Sa¬ 
mos with a mighty armament, and forthwith 
laid siege to the place. In one of the assaults 
upon the walls, they forced their way to the top 
of the tower which stands by the sea on the side 
where the suburb is, but Polycrates came in 
person to the rescue with a strong force, and 
beat them back. Meanwhile at the upper tower, 
which stood on the ridge of the hill, the be¬ 
sieged, both mercenaries and Samians, made a 
sally; but after they had withstood the Lace¬ 
daemonians a short time, they fled backwards, 
and the Lacedaemonians, pressing upon them, 
slew numbers. 

55. If now all who were present had be¬ 
haved that day like Archias and Lycopas, two 
of the Lacedaemonians, Samos might have been 
taken. For these two heroes, following hard 
upon the flying Samians, entered the city along 
with them, and, being all alone, and their re¬ 
treat cut off, were slain within the walls of the 
place. I myself once fell in with the grandson of 
this Archias, a man named Archias like his 
grandsire, and the son of Samius, whom I met 
at Pitana, to which canton he belonged. He re¬ 
spected the Samians beyond all other foreign¬ 
ers, and he told me that his father was called 
Samius, because his grandfather Archias died 
in Samos so gloriously, and that the reason why 
he respected the Samians so greatly was that 
his grandsire was buried with public honours 
by the Samian people. 

56. The Lacedaemonians besieged Samos 
during forty days, but not making any progress 
before the place, they raised the siege at the 
end of that time, and returned home to the 
Peloponnese. There is a silly tale told that Poly¬ 
crates struck a quantity of the coin of his 
country in lead, and, coating it with gold, gave 
it to the Lacedaemonians, who on receiving it 
took their departure. 

This was the first expedition into Asia of the 
Lacedaemonian Dorians. 

57. The Samians who had fought against 
Polycrates, when they knew that the Lacedae¬ 
monians were about to forsake them, left Sa¬ 
mos themselves, and sailed to Siphnos. They 
happened to be in want of money; and the 
Siphnians at that time were at the height of 
their, greatness, no islanders having so much 
wealth as they. There were mines of gold and 
silver in their country, and of so rich a yield, 
that from a tithe of the ores the Siphnians 
furnished out a treasury at Delphi which was 
on a par with the grandest there. What the 
mines yielded was divided year by year among 



102 HERODOTUS F Book iii 


the citizens. At the time when they formed the 
treasury, the Siphnians consulted the oracle, 
and asked whether their good things would re¬ 
main to them many years. The Pythoness made 
answer as follows:— 

When the Prytanies' seat shines white in the island 

of Siphnos, 

White-browed all the Jorum—need then of a true 

seePs wisdom — 

Danger will threat from a wooden host, and a her¬ 
ald in scarlet. 

Now about this time the forum of the Siph¬ 
nians and their townhall or prytaneum had 
been adorned with Parian marble. 

58. The Siphnians, however, were unable 
to understand the oracle, either at the time 
when it was given, or afterwards on the ar¬ 
rival of the Samians. For these last no sooner 
came to anchor off the island than they sent 
one of their vessels, with an ambassage on 
board, to the city. All ships in these early times 
were painted with vermilion; and this was 
what the Pythoness had meant when she told 
them to beware of danger “from a wooden 
host, and a herald in scarlet.” So the ambas¬ 
sadors came ashore and besought the Siphnians 
to lend them ten talents; but the Siphnians re¬ 
fused, whereupon the Samians began to plun¬ 
der their lands. Tidings of this reached the 
Siphnians, who straightway sallied forth to 
save their crops; then a battle was fought, in 
which the Siphnians suffered defeat, and many 
of their number were cut off from the city by 
the Samians, after which these latter forced the 
Siphnians to give them a hundred talents. 

59. With this money they bought of the 
Hermionians the island of Hydrea, off the 
coast of the Peloponnese, and this they gave 
in trust to the Troezenians, to keep for them, 
while they themselves went on to Crete, and 
founded the city of Cydonia. They had not 
meant, when they set sail, to settle there, but 
only to drive out the Zacynthians from the is¬ 
land. However they rested at Cydonia, where 
they flourished greatly for five years. It was 
they who built the various temples that may 
still be seen at that place, and among them the 
fane of Dictyna. But in the sixth year they 
were attacked by the Eginetans, who beat 
them in a sea-fight, and, with the help of the 
Cretans, reduced them all to slavery. The beaks 
of their ships, which carried the figure of a 
wild boar, they sawed off, and laid them up in 
the temple of Minerva in Egina. The Egine¬ 
tans took part against the Samians on account 
of an ancient grudge, since the Samians had 


first, when Amphicrates was king of Samos, 
made war on them and done great harm to 
their island, suffering, however, much damage 
also themselves. Such was the reason which 
moved the Eginetans to make this attack. 

60. I have dwelt the longer on the affairs of 
the Samians, because three of the greatest 
works in all Greece were made by them. One 
is a tunnel, under a hill one hundred and fifty 
fathoms high, carried entirely through the base 
of the hill, with a mouth at either end. The 
length of the cutting is seven furlongs—the 
height and width are each eight feet. Along the 
whole course there is a second cutting, twenty 
cubits deep and three feet broad, whereby 
water is brought, through pipes, from an 
abundant source into the city. The architect of 
this tunnel was Eupalinus, son of Naustroph- 
us, a Megarian. Such is the first of their great 
works; the second is a mole in the sea, which 
goes all round the harbour, near twenty fath¬ 
oms deep, and in length above two furlongs. 
The third is a temple; the largest of all the 
temples known to us, whereof Rhcecus, son 
of Phileus, a Samian, was first architect. Be¬ 
cause of these works I have dwelt the longer 
on the affairs of Samos. 

61. While Cambyses, son of Cyrus, after los¬ 
ing his senses, still lingered in Egypt, two 
Magi, brothers, revolted against him. One of 
them had been left in Persia by Cambyses as 
comptroller of his household; and it was he 
who began the revolt. Aware that Smerdis 
was dead, and that his death was hid and 
known to few of the Persians, while most be¬ 
lieved that he was still alive, he laid his plan, 
and made a bold stroke for the crown. He had 
a brother—the same of whom I spoke before 
as his partner in the revolt—who happened 
greatly to resemble Smerdis the son of Cyrus, 
whom Cambyses his brother had put to death. 
And not only was this brother of his like 
Smerdis in person, but he also bore the self¬ 
same name, to wit Smerdis. Patizeithes, the 
other Magus, having persuaded him that he 
would carry the whole business through, took 
him and made him sit upon the royal throne. 
Having so done, he sent heralds through all the 
land, to Egypt and elsewhere, to make proc¬ 
lamation to the troops that henceforth they 
were to obey Smerdis the son of Cyrus, and not 
Cambyses. 

62. The other heralds therefore made proc¬ 
lamation as they were ordered, and likewise 
the herald whose place it was to proceed into 
Egypt. He, when he reached Agbatana in 






58 - 65 ] THE HISTORY 103 


Syria, finding Cambyses and his army there, 
went straight into the middle of the host, and 
standing forth before them all, made the proc¬ 
lamation which Patizeithes the Magus had 
commanded. Cambyses no sooner heard him, 
than believing that what the herald said was 
true, and imagining that he had been betrayed 
by Prexaspes (who, he supposed, had not put 
Smerdis to death when sent into Persia for that 
purpose), he turned his eyes full upon Prex¬ 
aspes, and said, “Is this the way, Prexaspes, 
that thou didst my errand?” “Oh! my liege,” 
answered the other, “there is no truth in the 
tidings that Smerdis thy brother has revolted 
against thee, nor hast thou to fear in time to 
come any quarrel, great or small, with that 
man. With my own hands I wrought thy will 
on him, and with my own hands I buried him. 
If of a truth the dead can leave their graves, 
expect Astyages the Mede to rise and fight 
against thee; but if the course of nature be the 
same as formerly, then be sure no ill will ever 
come upon thee from this quarter. Now, there¬ 
fore, my counsel is that we send in pursuit of 
the herald, and strictly question him who it 
was that charged him to bid us obey king 
Smerdis.” 

63. When Prexaspes had so spoken, and 
Cambyses had approved his words, the herald 
was forthwith pursued, and brought back to 
the king. Then Prexaspes said to him, “Sirrah, 
thou bear’st us a message, sayst thou, from 
Smerdis, son of Cyrus. Now answer truly, and 
go thy way scathless. Did Smerdis have thee to 
his presence and give thee thy orders, or hadst 
thou them from one of his officers?” The her¬ 
ald answered, “Truly I have not set eyes on 
Smerdis son of Cyrus, since the day when king 
Cambyses led the Persians into Egypt. The 
man who gave me my orders was the Magus 
that Cambyses left in charge of the household; 
but he said that Smerdis son of Cyrus sent you 
the message.” In all this the herald spoke noth¬ 
ing but the strict truth. Then Cambyses said 
thus to Prexaspes:—“Thou art free from all 
blame, Prexaspes, since, as a right good man, 
thou hast not failed to do the thing which I 
commanded. But tell me now, which of the 
Persians can have taken the name of Smerdis, 
and revolted from me?” “I think, my liege,” 
he answered, “that I apprehend the whole busi¬ 
ness. The men who have risen in revolt 
against thee are the two Magi, Patizeithes, 
who was left comptroller of thy household, and 
his brother, who is named Smerdis.” 

64. Cambyses no sooner heard the name of 


Smerdis than he was struck with the truth of 
Prexaspes’ words, and the fulfilment of his 
own dream—the dream, I mean, which he had 
in former days, when one appeared to him in 
his sleep and told him that Smerdis sate upon 
the royal throne, and with his head touched 
the heavens. So when he saw that he had need¬ 
lessly slain his brother Smerdis, he wept and 
bewailed his loss: after which, smarting with 
vexation as he thought of all his ill luck, he 
sprang hastily upon his steed, meaning to 
march his army with all haste to Susa against 
the Magus. As he made his spring, the button 
of his sword-sheath fell off, and the bared point 
entered his thigh, wounding him exactly 
where he had himself once wounded the Egyp¬ 
tian god Apis. Then Cambyses, feeling that he 
had got his death-wound, inquired the name of 
the place where he was, and was answered, 
“Agbatana.” Now before this it had been told 
him by the oracle at Buto that he should end 
his days at Agbatana. He, however, had under¬ 
stood the Median Agbatana, where all his 
treasures were, and had thought that he should 
die there in a good old age; but the oracle 
meant Agbatana in Syria. So when Cambyses 
heard the name of the place, the double shock 
that he had received, from the revolt of the 
Magus and from his wound, brought him back 
to his senses. And he understood now the true 
meaning of the oracle, and said, “Here then 
Cambyses, son of Cyrus, is doomed to die.” 

65. At this time he said no more; but twenty 
days afterwards he called to his presence all the 
chief Persians who were with the army, and 
addressed them as follows:—“Persians, needs 
must I tell you now what hitherto I have striv¬ 
en with the greatest care to keep concealed. 
When I was in Egypt I saw in my sleep a vi¬ 
sion, which would that I had never beheld! I 
thought a messenger came to me from my 
home, and told me that Smerdis sate upon the 
royal throne, and with his head touched the 
heavens. Then I feared to be cast from my 
throne by Smerdis my brother, and I did what 
was more hasty than wise. Ah! truly, do what 
they may, it is impossible for men to turn aside 
the coming fate. I, in my folly, sent Prexaspes 
to Susa to put my brother to death. So this 
great woe was accomplished, and I then lived 
without fear, never imagining that, after Smer¬ 
dis was dead, I need dread revolt from any 
other. But herein I had quite mistaken what 
was about to happen, and so I slew my brother 
without any need, and nevertheless have lost 
my crown. For it was Smerdis the Magus, and 


104 HERODOTUS [Book in 


not Smerdis my brother, of whose rebellion 
God forewarned me by the vision. The deed is 
done, however, and Smerdis, son of Cyrus, be 
sure is lost to you. The Magi have the royal 
power—Patizeithes, whom I left at Susa to 
overlook my household, and Smerdis his broth¬ 
er. There was one who would have been 
bound beyond all others to avenge the wrongs 
I have suffered from these Magians, but he, 
alas! has perished by a horrid fate, deprived of 
life by those nearest and dearest to him. In his 
default, nothing now remains for me but to 
tell you, O Persians, what I would wish to have 
done after I have breathed my last. Therefore, 
in the name of the gods that watch over our 
royal house, I charge you all, and specially such 
of you as are Achaemenids, that ye do not tame¬ 
ly allow the kingdom to go back to the Medes. 
Recover it one way or another, by force or 
fraud; by fraud, if it is by fraud that they have 
seized on it; by force, if force has helped them 
in their enterprise. Do this, and then may your 
land bring you forth fruit abundantly, and 
your wives bear children, and your herds in¬ 
crease, and freedom be your portion for ever: 
but do it not—make no brave struggle to re¬ 
gain the kingdom—and then my curse be on 
you, and may the opposite of all these things 
happen to you—and not only so, but may you, 
one and all, perish at the last by such a fate as 
mine!” Then Cambyses, when he left speak¬ 
ing, bewailed his whole misfortune from be¬ 
ginning to end. 

66. Whereupon the Persians, seeing their 
king weep, rent the garments that they had on, 
and uttered lamentable cries; after which, as 
the bone presently grew carious, and the limb 
gangrened, Cambyses, son of Cyrus, died. He 
had reigned in all seven years and five months, 
and left no issue behind him, male or female. 
The Persians who had heard his words, put no 
faith in anything that he said concerning the 
Magi having the royal power; but believed that 
he spoke out of hatred towards Smerdis, and 
had invented the tale of his death to cause the 
whole Persian race to rise up in arms against 
him. Thus they were convinced that it was 
Smerdis the son of Cyrus who had rebelled and 
now sate on the throne. For Prexaspes stoutly 
denied that he had slain Smerdis, since it was 
not safe for him, after Cambyses was dead, to 
allow that a son of Cyrus had met with death 
at his hands. 

67. Thus then Cambyses died, and the 
Magus now reigned in security, and passed 
himself off for Smerdis the son of Cyrus. And 


so went by the seven months which were 
wanting to complete the eighth year of Cam¬ 
byses. His subjects, while his reign lasted, re¬ 
ceived great benefits from him, insomuch that, 
when he died, all the dwellers in Asia 
mourned his loss exceedingly, except only the 
Persians. For no sooner did he come to the 
throne than forthwith he sent round to every 
nation under his rule, and granted them free¬ 
dom from war-service and from taxes for the 
space of three years. 

68. In the eighth month, however, it was 
discovered who he was in the mode following. 
There was a man called Otanes, the son of 
Pharnaspes, who for rank and wealth was 
equal to the greatest of the Persians. This 
Otanes was the first to suspect that the Magus 
was not Smerdis the son of Cyrus, and to sur¬ 
mise moreover who he really was. He was led 
to guess the truth by the king never quitting 
the citadel, and never calling before him any 
of the Persian noblemen. As soon, therefore, as 
his suspicions were aroused he adopted the fol¬ 
lowing measures:—One of his daughters, who 
was called Phaedima, had been married to Cam¬ 
byses, and was taken to wife, together with the 
rest of Cambyses’ wives, by the Magus. To this 
daughter Otanes sent a message, and inquired 
of her “who it was whose bed she shared,— 
was it Smerdis the son of Cyrus, or was it 
some other man.^” Phaedima in reply declared 
she did not know—Smerdis the son of Cyrus 
she had never seen, and so she could not tell 
whose bed she shared. Upon this Otanes sent 
a second time, and said, “If thou dost not 
know Smerdis son of Cyrus thyself, ask queen 
Atossa who it is with whom ye both live—she 
cannot fail to know her own brother.” To this 
the daughter made answer, “I can neither get 
speech with Atossa, nor with any of the women 
who lodge in the palace. For no sooner did this 
man, be he who he may, obtain the kingdom, 
than he parted us from one another, and gave 
us all separate chambers.” 

69. This made the matter seem still more 
plain to Otanes. Nevertheless he sent a third 
message to his daughter in these words follow¬ 
ing:—“Daughter, thou art of noble blood— 
thou wilt not shrink from a risk which thy 
father bids thee encounter. If this fellow be 
not Smerdis the son of Cyrus, but the man 
whom I think him to be, his boldness in tak¬ 
ing thee to be his wife, and lording it over the 
Persians, must not be allowed to pass unpun¬ 
ished. Now therefore do as I command—when 
next he passes the night with thee, wait till 





66-73 THE HISTORY 105 


thou art sure he is fast asleep, and then feel for 
his ears. If thou findest him to have ears, then 
believe him to be Smerdis the son of Cyrus, hut 
if he has none, know him for Smerdis the 
Magian.” Phaedima returned for answer, “It 
would be a great risk. If he was without ears, 
and caught her feeling for them, she well knew 
he would make away with her—nevertheless 
she would venture.” So Otanes got his daugh¬ 
ter’s promise that she would do as he desired. 
Now Smerdis the Magian had had his ears cut 
off in the lifetime of Cyrus son of Cambyses, as 
a punishment for a crime of no slight heinous¬ 
ness. Phaedima therefore, Otanes’ daughter, 
bent on accomplishing what she had promised 
her father, when her turn came, and she was 
taken to the bed of the Magus (in Persia a 
man’s wives sleep with him in their turns), 
waited till he was sound asleep, and then felt 
for his ears. She quickly perceived that he had 
no ears; and of this, as soon as day dawned, she 
sent word to her father. 

70. Then Otanes took to him two of the 
chief Persians, Aspathines and Gobryas, men 
whom it was most advisable to trust in such a 
matter, and told them everything. Now they 
had already of themselves suspected how the 
matter stood. When Otanes therefore laid his 
reasons before them they at once came into his 
views; and it was agreed that each of the three 
should take as companion in the work the 
Persian in whom he placed the greatest con¬ 
fidence. Then Otanes chose Intaphernes, Go¬ 
bryas Megabyzus, and Aspathines Hydarnes. 
After the number had thus become six, Darius, 
the son of Hystaspes, arrived at Susa from Per¬ 
sia, whereof his father was governor. On his 
coming it seemed good to the six to take him 
likewise into their counsels. 

71. After this, the men, being now seven in 
all, met together to exchange oaths, and hold 
discourse with one another. And when it 
came to the turn of Darius to speak his mind, 
he said as follows:—“Methought no one but I 
knew that Smerdis, the son of Cyrus, was not 
now alive, and that Smerdis the Magian ruled 
over us; on this account I came hither with 
speed, to compass the death of the Magian. 
But as it seems the matter is known to you all, 
and not to me only, my judgment is that we 
should act at once, and not any longer delay. 
For to do so were not well.” Otanes spoke upon 
this:—“Son of Hystaspes,” said he, “thou art 
the child of a brave father, and seemest likely 
to show thyself as bold a gallant as he. Beware, 
however, of rash haste in this matter; do not 


hurry so, but proceed with soberness. We must 
add to our number ere we adventure to strike 
the blow.” “Not so,” Darius rejoined; “for let 
all present be well assured that if the advice of 
Otanes guide our acts, we shall perish most 
miserably. Some one will betray our plot to the 
Magians for lucre’s sake. Ye ought to have 
kept the matter to yourselves, and so made the 
venture; but as ye have chosen to take others 
into your secret, and have opened the matter to 
me, take my advice and make the attempt to¬ 
day—or if not, if a single day be suffered to 
pass by, be sure that I will let no one betray me 
to the Magian. I myself will go to him, and 
plainly denounce you all.” 

72. Otanes, when he saw Darius so hot, re¬ 
plied, “But if thou wilt force us to action, and 
not allow a day’s delay, tell us, I pray thee, how 
we shall get entrance into the palace, so as to 
set upon them. Guards are placed everywhere, 
as thou thyself well knowest—for if thou hast 
not seen, at least thou hast heard tell of them. 
How are we to pass these guards, I ask thee.^” 
“Otanes,” answered Darius, “there are many 
things easy enough in act, which by speech it 
is hard to explain. There are also things con¬ 
cerning which speech is easy, but no noble ac¬ 
tion follows when the speech is done. As for 
these guards, ye know well that we shall not 
find it hard to make our way through them. 
Our rank alone would cause them to allow us 
to enter—shame and fear alike forbidding 
them to say us nay. But besides, I have the fair¬ 
est plea that can be conceived for gaining ad¬ 
mission. I can say that I have just come from 
Persia, and have a message to deliver to the 
king from my father. An untruth must be 
spoken, where need requires. For whether men 
lie, or say true, it is with one and the same ob¬ 
ject. Men lie, because they think to gain by 
deceiving others; and speak the truth, because 
they expect to get something by their true 
speaking, and to be trusted afterwards in more 
important matters. Thus, though their conduct 
is so opposite, the end of both is alike. If there 
were no gain to be got, your true-speaking man 
would tell untruths as much as your liar, and 
your liar would tell the truth as much as your 
true-speaking man. The doorkeeper, who lets 
us in-readily, shall have his guerdon some day 
or other; but woe to the man who resists us, 
he must forthwith be declared an enemy. Forc¬ 
ing our way past him, we will press in and go 
straight to our work.” 

73. After Darius had thus said, Gobryas 
spoke as follows:—“Dear friends, when will 


106 HERODOTUS [Book hi 


a fitter occasion of?er for us to recover the king¬ 
dom, or, if we are not strong enough, at least 
die in the attempt? Consider that vve Persians 
are governed by a Median Magus, and one, too, 
who has had his ears cut off! Some of you were 
present when Cambyses lay upon his death¬ 
bed—such, doubtless, remember what curses 
he called down upon the Persians if they made 
no effort to recover the kingdom. Then, in¬ 
deed, we paid but little heed to what he said, 
because we thought he spoke out of hatred to 
set us against his brother. Now, however, my 
vote is that we do as Darius has counselled— 
march straight in a body to the palace from the 
place where we now are, and forthwith set 
upon the Magian.” So Gobryas spake, and the 
others all approved. 

74. While the seven were thus taking coun¬ 
sel together, it so chanced that the following 
events were happening:—The Magi had been 
thinking what they had best do, and had re¬ 
solved for many reasons to make a friend of 
Prexaspes. They knew how cruelly he had 
been outraged by Cambyses, who slew his son 
with an arrow; they were also aware that it 
was by his hand that Smerdis the son of Cyrus 
fell, and that he was the only person privy to 
that prince’s death; and they further found 
him to be held in the highest esteem by all the 
Persians. So they called him to them, made 
him their friend, and bound him by a promise 
and by oaths to keep silence about the fraud 
which they were practising upon the Persians, 
and not discover it to any one; and they 
pledged themselves that in this case they would 
give him thousands of gifts of every sort and 
kind. So Prexaspes agreed, and the Magi, when 
they found that they had persuaded him so 
far, went on to another proposal, and said they 
vv'ould assemble the Persians at the foot of the 
palace wall, and he should mount one of the 
towers and harangue them from it, assuring 
them that Smerdis the son of Cyrus, and none 
but he, ruled the land. This they bade him do, 
because Prexaspes was a man of great weight 
with his countrymen, and had often declared 
in public that Smerdis the son of Cyrus was 
still alive, and denied being his murderer. 

75. Prexaspes said he was quite ready to do 
their will in the matter; so the Magi assembled 
the people, and placed Prexaspes upon the top 
of the tower, and told him to make his speech. 
Then this man, forgetting of set purpose all 
that the Magi had intreated him to say, began 
with Achaemenes, and traced down the descent 
of Cyrus; after which, when he came to that 


king, he recounted all the services that had 
been rendered by him to the Persians, from 
whence he went on to declare the truth, which 
hitherto he had concealed, he said, because it 
would not have been safe for him to make it 
known, but now necessity was laid on him to 
disclose the whole. Then he told how, forced 
to it by Cambyses, he had himself taken the life 
of Smerdis, son of Cyrus, and how that Persia 
was now ruled by the Magi. Last of all, with 
many curses upon the Persians if they did not 
recover the kingdom, and wreak vengeance on 
the Magi, he threw himself headlong from the 
tower into the abyss below. Such was the end 
of Prexaspes, a man all his life of high repute 
among the Persians. 

76. And now the seven Persians, having re¬ 
solved that they would attack the Magi with¬ 
out more delay, first offered prayers to the gods 
and then set off for the palace, quite unac¬ 
quainted with what had been done by Prexas¬ 
pes. The news of his doings reached them 
upon their way, when they had accomplished 
about half the distance. Hereupon they turned 
aside out of the road, and consulted together. 
Otanes and his party said they must certainly 
put off the business, and not make the attack 
when affairs were in such a ferment. Darius, 
on the other hand, and his friends, were 
against any change of plan, and wished to go 
straight on, and not lose a moment. Now, as 
they strove together, suddenly there came 
in sight two pairs of vultures, and seven 
pairs of hawks, pursuing them, and the hawks 
tore the vultures both with their claws and 
bills. At this sight the seven with one accord 
came in to the opinion of Darius, and encour¬ 
aged by the omen hastened on towards the 
palace. 

77. At the gate they were received as Darius 
had foretold. The guards, who had no suspi¬ 
cion that they came for any ill purpose, and 
held the chief Persians in much reverence, let 
them pass without difficulty—it seemed as if 
they were under the special protection of the 
gods—none even asked them any question. 
When they were now in the great court they 
fell in with certain of the eunuchs, whose bus¬ 
iness it was to carry the king’s messages, who 
stopped them and asked what they wanted, 
while at the same time they threatened the 
doorkeepers for having let them enter. The 
seven sought to press on, but the eunuchs 
would not suffer them. Then these men, with 
cheers encouraging one another, drew their 
daggers, and stabbing those who strove to 





74-8i] the history 107 


withstand them, rushed forward to the apart¬ 
ment of the males. 

78. Now both the Magi were at this time 
within, holding counsel upon the matter of 
Prexaspes. So when they heard the stir among 
the eunuchs, and their loud cries, they ran out 
themselves, to see what was happening. In¬ 
stantly perceiving their danger, they both flew 
to arms; one had just time to seize his bow, the 
other got hold of his lance; when straightway 
the fight began. The one whose weapon was 
the bow found it of no service at all; the foe 
was too near, and the combat too close to allow 
of his using it. But the other made a stout de¬ 
fence with his lance, wounding two of the 
seven, Aspathines in the leg, and Intaphernes 
in the eye. This wound did not kill Intaphernes, 
but it cost him the sight of that eye. The other 
Magus, when he found his bow of no avail, 
fled into a chamber which opened out into the 
apartment of the males, intending to shut 
the doors. But two of the seven entered the 
room with him, Darius and Gobryas. Gobryas 
seized the Magus and grappled with him, 
while Darius stood over them, not knowing 
what to do; for it was dark, and he was afraid 
that if he struck a blow he might kill Gobryas. 
Then Gobyras, when he perceived that Darius 
stood doing nothing, asked him, “why his 
hand was idle.^” “I fear to hurt thee,” he 
answered. “Fear not,” said Gobryas; “strike, 
though it be through both.” Darius did as he 
desired, drove his dagger home, and by good 
hap killed the Magus. 

79. Thus were the Magi slain; and the seven, 
cutting of! both the heads, and leaving their 
own wounded in the palace, partly because 
they were disabled, and partly to guard the cit¬ 
adel, went forth from the gates with the heads 
in their hands, shouting and making an up¬ 
roar. They called out to all the Persians whom 
they met, and told them what had happened, 
showing them the heads of the Magi, while at 
the same time they slew every Magus who fell 
in their way. Then the Persians, when they 
knew what the seven had done, and under¬ 
stood the fraud of the Magi, thought it but just 
to follow the example set them, and, drawing 
their daggers, they killed the Magi wherever 
they could find any. Such was their fury, that, 
unless night had closed in, not a single Magus 
would have been left alive. The Persians ob¬ 
serve this day with one accord, and keep it 
more strictly than any other in the whole year. 
It is then that they hold the great festival, 
which they call the Magophonia. No Magus 


may show himself abroad during the whole 
time that the feast lasts; but all must remain at 
home the entire day. 

80. And now when five days were gone, and 
the hubbub had settled down, the conspirators 
met together to consult about the situation of 
affairs. At this meeting speeches were made, to 
which many of the Greeks give no credence, 
but they were made nevertheless. Otanes rec¬ 
ommended that the management of public af¬ 
fairs should be entrusted to the whole nation. 
“To me,” he said, “it seems advisable, that we 
should no longer have a single man to rule 
over us—the rule of one is neither good nor 
pleasant. Ye cannot have forgotten to what 
lengths Cambyses went in his haughty tyranny, 
and the haughtiness of the Magi ye have your¬ 
selves experienced. How indeed is it possible 
that monarchy should be a well-adjusted thing, 
when it allows a man to do as he likes without 
being answerable.^ Such licence is enough to 
stir strange and unwonted thoughts in the 
heart of the worthiest of men. Give a person 
this power, and straightway his manifold good 
things puff him up with pride, while envy is 
so natural to human kind that it cannot but 
arise in him. But pride and envy together in¬ 
clude all wickedness—both of them leading on 
to deeds of savage violence. True it is that 
kings, possessing as they do all that heart can de¬ 
sire, ought to be void of envy; but the contrary 
is seen in their conduct towards the citizens. 
They are jealous of the most virtuous among 
their subjects, and wish their death; while they 
take delight in the meanest and basest, being 
ever ready to listen to the tales of slanderers. A 
king, besides, is beyond all other men incon¬ 
sistent with himself. Pay him court in modera¬ 
tion, and he is angry because you do not show 
him more profound respect—show him pro¬ 
found respect, and he is offended again, be¬ 
cause (as he says) you fawn on him. But the 
worst of all is, that he sets aside the laws of the 
land, puts men to death without trial, and sub¬ 
jects women to violence. The rule of the many, 
on the other hand, has, in the first place, the 
fairest of names, to wit, isonomy; and further 
it is free from all those outrages which a king 
is wont to commit. There, places are given by 
lot, the magistrate is answerable for what he 
does, and measures rest with the commonalty. 
I vote, therefore, that we do away with mon¬ 
archy, and raise the people to power. For the 
people are all in all.” 

81. Such were the sentiments of Otanes. 
Megabyzus spoke next, and advised the setting 



108 HERODOTUS [Book hi 


up of an oligarchy:—“In all that Otanes has 
said to persuade you to put down monarchy,” 
he observed, “I fully concur; but his recom¬ 
mendation that we should call the people to 
power seems to me not the best advice. For 
there is nothing so void of understanding, 
nothing so full of wantonness, as the unwieldy 
rabble. It were folly not to be borne, for men, 
while seeking to escape the wantonness of a 
tyrant, to give themselves up to the wanton¬ 
ness of a rude unbridled mob. The tyrant, in 
all his doings, at least knows what is he about, 
but a mob is altogether devoid of knowledge; 
for how should there be any knowledge in a 
rabble, untaught, and with no natural sense of 
what is right and fit.^ It rushes >vildly into state 
affairs with all the fury of a stream swollen in 
the winter, and confuses everything. Let the 
enemies of the Persians be ruled by democra¬ 
cies; but let us choose out from the citizens a 
certain number of the worthiest, and put the 
government into their hands. For thus both we 
ourselves shall be among the governors, and 
power being entrusted to the best men, it is 
likely that the best counsels will prevail in the 
state.” 

82. This was the advice which Megabyzus 
gave, and after him Darius came forward, and 
spoke as follows:—“All that Megabyzus said 
against democracy was well said, I think; but 
about oligarchy he did not speak advisedly; for 
take these three forms of government—democ¬ 
racy, oligarchy, and monarchy—and let them 
each be at their best, I maintain that monarchy 
far surpasses the other two. What government 
can possibly be better than that of the very best 
man in the whole state The counsels of such 
a man are like himself, and so he governs the 
mass of the people to their heart’s content; 
while at the same time his measures against 
evil-doers are kept more secret than in other 
states. Contrariwise, in oligarchies, where men 
vie with each other in the service of the com¬ 
monwealth, fierce enmities are apt to arise be¬ 
tween man and man, each wishing to be lead¬ 
er, and to carry his own measures; whence vio¬ 
lent quarrels come, which lead to open strife, 
often ending in bloodshed. Then monarchy is 
sure to follow; and this too shows how far that 
rule surpasses all others. Again, in a democra¬ 
cy, it is impossible but that there will be mal¬ 
practices: these malpractices, however, do not 
lead to enmities, but to close friendships, 
which are formed among those engaged in 
them, who must hold well together to carry on 
their villainies. And so things go on until a 


man stands forth as champion of the common¬ 
alty, and puts down the evil-doers. Straight¬ 
way the author of so great a service is admired 
by all, and from being admired soon comes to 
be appointed king; so that here too it is plain 
that monarchy is the best government. Lastly, 
to sum up all in a word, whence, I ask, was it 
that we got the freedom which we enjoy— 
did democracy give it us, or oligarchy, or a 
monarch.^ As a single man recovered our free¬ 
dom for us, my sentence is that we keep to the 
rule of one. Even apart from this, we ought not 
to change the laws of our forefathers when they 
work fairly; for to do so is not well.” 

83. Such were the three opinions brought 
forward at this meeting; the four other Per¬ 
sians voted in favour of the last. Otanes, who 
wished to give his countrymen a democracy, 
when he found the decision against him, arose 
a second time, and spoke thus before the as¬ 
sembly:—“Brother conspirators, it is plain that 
the king who is to be chosen will be one of our¬ 
selves, whether we make the choice by casting 
lots for the prize, or by letting the people de¬ 
cide which of us they will have to rule over 
them, in or any other way. Now, as I have 
neither a mind to rule nor to be ruled, I shall 
not enter the lists with you in this matter. I 
withdraw, however, on one condition—none of 
you shall claim to exercise rule over me or my 
seed for ever.” The six agreed to these terms, 
and Otanes withdrew and stood aloof from 
the contest. And still to this day the family of 
Otanes continues to be the only free family in 
Persia; those who belong to it submit to the 
rule of the king only so far as they themselves 
choose; they are bound, however, to observe 
the laws of the land like the other Persians. 

84. After this the six took counsel together, 
as to the fairest way of setting up a king: and 
first, with respect to Otanes, they resolved, that 
if any of their own number got the kingdom, 
Otanes and his seed after him should receive 
year by year, as a mark of special honour, a 
Median robe, and all such other gifts as are ac¬ 
counted the most honourable in Persia. And 
these they resolved to give him, because he was 
the man who first planned the outbreak, and 
who brought the seven together. These privi¬ 
leges, therefore, were assigned specially to 
Otanes. The following were made common to 
them all:—It was to be free to each, whenever 
he pleased, to enter the palace unannounced, 
unless the king were in the company of one of 
his wives; and the king was to be bound to 
marry into no family excepting those of the 






82-80 THE HISTORY 109 


conspirators. Concerning the appointment of 
a king, the resolve to which they came was the 
following:—They would ride out together 
next morning into the skirts of the city, and he 
whose steed first neighed after the sun was up 
should have the kingdom. 

85. Now Darius had a groom, a sharp-wit¬ 
ted knave, called CEbares. After the meeting 
had broken up, Darius sent for him, and said, 
“CEbares, this is the way in which the king is 
to be chosen—we are to mount our horses, and 
the man whose horse first neighs after the sun 
is up is to have the kingdom. If then you have 
any cleverness, contrive a plan whereby the 
prize may fall to us, and not go to another.” 
“Truly, master,” CEbares answered, “if it de¬ 
pends on this whether thou shalt be king or no, 
set thine heart at ease, and fear nothing: I 
have a charm which is sure not to fail.” “If 
thou hast really aught of the kind,” said Dari¬ 
us, “hasten to get it ready. The matter does 
not brook delay, for the trial is to be to-mor¬ 
row.” So CEbares when he heard that, did as 
follows:—When night came, he took one of 
the mares, the chief favourite of the horse 
which Darius rode, and tethering it in the sub¬ 
urb, brought his master’s horse to the place; 
then, after leading him round and round the 
mare several times, nearer and nearer at each 
circuit, he ended by letting them come togeth¬ 
er. 

86. And now, when the morning broke, the 
six Persians, according to agreement, met to¬ 
gether on horseback, and rode out to the sub¬ 
urb. As they went along they neared the spot 
where the mare was tethered the night before, 
whereupon the horse of Darius sprang for¬ 
ward and neighed. Just at the same time, 
though the sky was clear and bright, there was 
a flash of lightning, followed by a thunder¬ 
clap. It seemed as if the heavens conspired with 
Darius, and hereby inaugurated him king: so 
the five other nobles leaped with one accord 
from their steeds, and bowed down before him 
and owned him for their king. 

87. This is the account which some of the 
Persians gave of the contrivance of CEbares; 
but there are others who relate the matter dif¬ 
ferently. They say that in the morning he 
stroked the mare with his hand, which he then 
hid in his trousers until the sun rose and the 
horses were about to start, when he suddenly 
drew his hand forth and put it to the nostrils 
of his master’s horse, which immediately snort¬ 
ed and neighed. 

88. Thus was Darius, son of Hystaspes, ap¬ 


pointed king; and, except the Arabians, all they 
of Asia were subject to him; for Cyrus, and 
after him Cambyses, had brought them all un¬ 
der. The Arabians were never subject as slaves 
to the Persians, but had a league of friendship 
with them from the time when they brought 
Cambyses on his way as he went into Egypt; 
for had they been unfriendly the Persians 
could never have made their invasion. 

And now Darius contracted marriages of the 
first rank, according to the notions of the Per¬ 
sians: to wit, with two daughters of Cyrus, 
Atossa and Artystone; of whom, Atossa had 
been twice married before, once to Cambyses, 
her brother, and once to the Magus, while the 
other, Artystone, was a virgin. He married also 
Parmys, daughter of Smerdis, son of Cyrus; 
and he likewise took to wife the daughter of 
Otanes, who had made the discovery about the 
Magus. And now when his power was estab¬ 
lished firmly throughout all the kingdoms, the 
first thing that he did was to set up a carving 
in stone, which showed a man mounted upon 
a horse, with an inscription in these words fol¬ 
lowing:—“Darius, son of Hystaspes, by aid of 
his good horse” (here followed the horse’s 
name), “and of his good groom CEbares, got 
himself the kingdom of the Persians.” 

89. This he set up in Persia; and afterwards 
he proceeded to establish twenty governments 
of the kind which the Persians call satrapies, 
assigning to each its governor, and fixing the 
tribute which was to be paid him by the sev¬ 
eral nations. And generally he joined together in 
one satrapy the nations that were neighbours, 
but sometimes he passed over the nearer tribes, 
and put in their stead those which were more 
remote. The following is an account of these 
governments, and of the yearly tribute which 
they paid to the king:—Such as brought their 
tribute in silver were ordered to pay according 
to the Babylonian talent; while the Euboic was 
the standard measure for such as brought gold. 
Now the Babylonian talent contains seventy 
Euboic minae.^ During all the reign of Cyrus, 
and afterwards when Cambyses ruled, there 
were no fixed tributes, but the nations several¬ 
ly brought gifts to the king. On account of this 

^ Standards of weight probably passed into 
Greece from Asia, when the word mina {uva) 
seems certainly to have been derived. That the 
standard known to the Greeks as the Euboic w as 
an Asiatic one, is plain from this passage. If the 
(later) Attic talent w'as w^orth ^243 15s., the Eu¬ 
boic (silver) talent would be /250 8s. 5d., and the 
Babylonian >^232 3s. 3d. 


110 HERODOTUS [ Book iii 


and other like doings, the Persians say that 
Darius was a huckster, Cambyses a master, and 
Cyrus a father; for Darius looked to making a 
gain in everything; Cambyses was harsh and 
reckless; while Cyrus was gentle, and pro¬ 
cured them all manner of goods. 

90. The lonians, the Magnesians of Asia, 
the /Eolians, the Carians, the Lycians, the Mily- 
ans, and the Pamphylians, paid their tribute 
in a single sum, which was fixed at four hun¬ 
dred talents of silver. These formed together 
the first satrapy. 

The Mysians, Lydians, Lasonians, Cabalians, 
and Hygennians paid the sum of five hundred 
talents. This was the second satrapy. 

The Hellespontians, of the right coast as one 
enters the straits, the Phrygians, the Asiatic 
Thracians, the Paphlagonians, the Mariandy- 
nians, and the Syrians paid a tribute of three 
hundred and sixty talents. This was the third 
satrapy. 

The Cilicians gave three hundred and sixty 
white horses, one for each day in the year, and 
five hundred talents of silver. Of this sum one 
hundred and forty talents went to pay the cav¬ 
alry which guarded the country, while the 
remaining three hundred and sixty were re¬ 
ceived by Darius. This was the fourth satrapy. 

91. The country reaching from the city of 
Posideium (built by Amphilochus, son of Am- 
phiaraiis, on the confines of Syria and Cilicia) 
to the borders of Egypt, excluding therefrom 
a district which belonged to Arabia and was 
free from tax, paid a tribute of three hundred 
and fifty talents. All Phcenicia, Palestine Syria, 
and Cyprus, were herein contained. This was 
the fifth satrapy. 

From Egypt, and the neighbouring parts of 
Libya, together with the towns of Cyrene and 
Barca, which belonged to the Egyptian satrapy, 
the tribute which came in was seven hundred 
talents. These seven hundred talents did not 
include the profits of the fisheries of Lake Mce- 
ris, nor the corn furnished to the troops at 
Memphis. Corn was supplied to 120,000 Per¬ 
sians, who dwelt at Memphis in the quarter 
called the White Castle, and to a number of 
auxiliaries. This was the sixth satrapy. 

The Sattagydians, the Gandarians, the Da- 
dicae, and the Aparytae, who were all reckoned 
together, paid a tribute of a hundred and sev¬ 
enty talents. This was the seventh satrapy. 

Susa, and the other parts of Cissia, paid three 
hundred talents. This was the eighth satrapy. 

92. From Babylonia, and the rest of Assyria, 
were drawn a thousand talents of silver, and 


five hundred boy-eunuchs. This was the ninth 
satrapy. 

Agbatana, and the other parts of Media, to¬ 
gether with the Paricanians and Orthocory- 
bantes, paid in all four hundred and fifty tal¬ 
ents. This was the tenth satrapy. 

The Caspians, Pausicae, Pantimathi, and 
Daritae, were joined in one government, and 
paid the sum of two hundred talents. This was 
the eleventh satrapy. 

From the Bactrian tribes as far as the ^Egli, 
the tribute received was three hundred and 
sixty talents. This was the twelfth satrapy. 

93. From Pactyi’ca, Armenia, and the coun¬ 
tries reaching thence to the Euxine, the sum 
drawn was four hundred talents. This was the 
thirteenth satrapy. 

The Sagartians, Sarangians, Thamanaeans, 
Utians, and Mycians, together with the inhab¬ 
itants of the islands in the Erythraean sea, 
where the king sends those whom he banishes, 
furnished altogether a tribute of six hundred 
talents. This was the fourteenth satrapy. 

The Sacans and Caspians gave two hun¬ 
dred and fifty talents. This was the fifteenth 
satrapy. 

The Parthians, Chorasmians, Sogdians, and 
Arians, gave three hundred. This was the six¬ 
teenth satrapy. 

94. The Paricanians and Ethiopians of Asia 
furnished a tribute of four hundred talents. 
This was the seventeenth satrapy. 

The Matienians, Saspeires, and Alarodians 
were rated to pay two hundred talents. This 
was the eighteenth satrapy. 

The Moschi, Tibareni, Macrones, Mosynceci, 
and Mares had to pay three hundred talents. 
This was the nineteenth satrapy. 

The Indians, who are more numerous than 
any other nation with which we are acquaint¬ 
ed, paid a tribute exceeding that of every other 
people, to wit, three hundred and sixty talents 
of gold-dust. This was the twentieth satrapy. 

95. If the Babylonian money here spoken of 
be reduced to the Euboic scale, it will make 
nine thousand five hundred and forty such tal¬ 
ents; and if the gold be reckoned at thirteen 
times the worth of silver, the Indian gold-dust 
will come to four thousand six hundred and 
eighty talents. Add these two amounts togeth¬ 
er and the whole revenue which came in to 
Darius year by year will be found to be 
in Euboic money fourteen thousand five hun¬ 
dred and sixty talents, not to mention parts of 
a talent. 

96. Such was the revenue which Darius de- 





00-102] THE HISTORY 111 


rived from Asia and a small part of Libya. La¬ 
ter in his reign the sum was increased by the 
tribute of the islands, and of the nations of Eu¬ 
rope as far as Thessaly. The Great King stores 
away the tribute which he receives after this 
fashion—he melts it down, and, while it is in 
a liquid state, runs it into earthen vessels, 
which are afterwards removed, leaving the 
metal in a solid mass. When money is wanted, 
he coins as much of this bullion as the occasion 
requires. 

97. Such then were the governments, and 
such the amounts of tribute at which they were 
assessed respectively. Persia alone has not been 
reckoned among the tributaries—and for this 
reason, because the country of the Persians is 
altogether exempt from tax. The following 
peoples paid no settled tribute, but brought 
gifts to the king: first, the Ethiopians border¬ 
ing upon Egypt, who were reduced by Cam- 
byses when he made war on the long-lived Ethi¬ 
opians, and who dwell about the sacred city 
of Nysa, and have festivals in honour of Bac¬ 
chus. The grain on which they and their next 
neighbours feed is the same as that used by the 
Calantian Indians. Their dwelling-houses are 
under ground. Every third year these two na¬ 
tions brought—and they still bring to my day 
—two choenices^ of virgin gold, two hundred 
logs of ebony, five Ethiopian boys, and twenty 
elephant tusks. The Colchians, and the neigh¬ 
bouring tribes who dwell between them and 
the Caucasus—for so far the Persian rule reach¬ 
es, while north of the Caucasus no one fears 
them any longer—undertook to furnish a gift, 
which in my day was still brought every fifth 
year, consisting of a hundred boys, and the 
same number of maidens. The Arabs brought 
every year a thousand talents of frankincense. 
Such were the gifts which the king received 
over and above the tribute-money. 

98. The way in which the Indians get the 
plentiful supply of gold which enables them 
to furnish year by year so vast an amount of 
gold-dust to the king, is the following:—east¬ 
ward of India lies a tract which is entirely 
sand. Indeed of all the inhabitants of Asia, con¬ 
cerning whom anything certain is known, the 
Indians dwell the nearest to the east, and the 
rising of the sun. Beyond them the whole 
country is desert on account of the sand. The 
tribes of Indians are numerous, and do not all 
speak the same language—some are wandering 
tribes, others not. They who dwell in the 
marshes along the river live on raw fish, which 

^ About two quarts. 


they take in boats made of reeds, each formed 
out of a single joint. These Indians wear a 
dress of sedge, which they cut in the river and 
bruise; afterwards they weave it into mats, and 
wear it as we wear a breast-plate. 

99. Eastward of these Indians are another 
tribe, called Padaeans, who are wanderers, and 
live on raw flesh. This tribe is said to have the 
following customs:—If one of their number 
be ill, man or woman, they take the sick per¬ 
son, and if he be a man, the men of his acquaint¬ 
ance proceed to put him to death, because, 
they say, his flesh would be spoilt for them if 
he pined and wasted away with sickness. The 
man protests he is not ill in the least; but his 
friends will not accept his denial—in spite of 
all he can say, they kill him, and feast them¬ 
selves on his body. So also if a woman be sick, 
the women, who are her friends, take her and 
do with her exactly the same as the men. If one 
of them reaches to old age, about which there 
is seldom any question, as commonly before 
that time they have had some disease or other, 
and so have been put to death—but if a man, 
notwithstanding, comes to be old, then they 
offer him in sacrifice to their gods, and after¬ 
wards eat his flesh. 

100. There is another set of Indians whose 
customs are very different. They refuse to put 
any live animal to death, they sow no corn, and 
have no dwelling-houses. Vegetables are their 
only food. There is a plant which grows wild 
in their country, bearing seed, about the size 
of millet-seed, in a calyx: their wont is to gath¬ 
er this seed and having boiled it, calyx and 
all, to use it for food. If one of them is attacked 
with sickness, he goes forth into the wilderness, 
and lies down to die; no one has the least con¬ 
cern either for the sick or for the dead. 

101. All the tribes which I have mentioned 
live together like the brute beasts: they have 
also all the same tint of skin, which approaches 
that of the Ethiopians. Their country is a long 
way from Persia towards the south: nor had 
king Darius ever any authority over them. 

102. Besides these, there are Indians of an¬ 
other tribe, who border on the city of Caspaty- 
rus, and the country of Pactyica; these people 
dwell northward of all the rest of the Indians, 
and fpllow nearly the same mode of life as the 
Bactrians. They are more warlike than any of 
the other tribes, and from them the men are 
sent forth who go to procure the gold. For it is 
in this part of India that the sandy desert lies. 
Here, in this desert, there live amid the sand 
great ants, in size somewhat less than dogs, 


1 


112 HERODOTUS [Book hi 


but bigger than foxes. The Persian king has a 
number of them, which have been caught by 
the hunters in the land whereof we are speak¬ 
ing. Those ants make their dwellings under 
ground, and like the Greek ants, which they 
very much resemble in shape, throw up sand- 
heaps as they burrow. Now the sand which 
they throw up is full of gold. The Indians, 
when they go into the desert to collect this 
sand, take three camels and harness them to¬ 
gether, a female in the middle and a male on 
either side, in a leading-rein. The rider sits on 
the female, and they are particular to choose 
for the purpose one that has but just dropped 
her young; for their female camels can run as 
fast as horses, while they bear burthens very 
much better. 

103. As the Greeks are well acquainted with 
the shape of the camel, I shall not trouble to 
describe it; but I shall mention what seems to 
have escaped their notice. The camel has in its 
hind legs four thigh-bones and four knee- 
joints.^ 

104. When the Indians therefore have thus 
equipped themselves they set oE in quest of 
the gold, calculating the time so that they may 
be engaged in seizing it during the most sultry 
part of the day, when the ants hide themselves 
to escape the heat. The sun in those parts shines 
fiercest in the morning, not, as elsewhere, at 
noonday; the greatest heat is from the time 
when he has reached a certain height, until the 
hour at which the market closes. During this 
space he burns much more furiously than at 
midday in Greece, so that the men there are 
said at that time to drench themselves with 
water. At noon his heat is much the same in 
India as in other countries, after which, as the 
day declines, the warmth is only equal to that 
of the morning sun elsewhere. Towards eve¬ 
ning the coolness increases, till about sunset it 
becomes very cold. 

105. When the Indians reach the place 
where the gold is, they fill their bags with the 
sand, and ride away at their best speed: the 
ants, however, scenting them, as the Persians 
say, rush forth in pursuit. Now these animals 
are, they declare, so swift, that there is nothing 
in the world like them: if it were not, there¬ 
fore, that the Indians get a start while the ants 
are mustering, not a single gold-gatherer could 

^ This is of course untrue, and it is difficult to 
understand how Herodotus could entertain such a 
notion. There is no real difference, as regards the 
anatomy of the leg, between the horse and the 
camel. 


escape. During the flight the male camels, I 
which are not so fleet as the females, grow i 
tired, and begin to drag, first one, and then the j 
other; but the females recollect the young j 
which they have left behind, and never give 
way or flag. Such, according to the Persians, is ; 
the manner in which the Indians get the great- 'j 
er part of their gold; some is dug out of the j 
earth, but of this the supply is more scanty. i 

106. It seems as if the extreme regions of the 
earth were blessed by nature with the most ex¬ 
cellent productions, just in the same way that 
Greece enjoys a climate more excellently tern- I 
pered than any other country. In India, which, 

as I observed lately, is the furthest region of the 
inhabited world towards the east, all the four- 
footed beasts and the birds are very much big- | 
ger than those found elsewhere, except only the ! 
horses, which are surpassed by the Median 1 
breed called the Nisaean. Gold too is produced 1 
there in vast abundance, some dug from the 
earth, some washed down by the rivers, some 
carried oE in the mode which I have but now | 
described. And further, there are trees which 
grow wild there, the fruit whereof is a wool 
exceeding in beauty and goodness that of 
sheep. The natives make their clothes of this 
tree-wool. 

107. Arabia is the last of inhabited lands to¬ 
wards the south, and it is the only country 
which produces frankincense, myrrh, cassia, 
cinnamon, and ledanum. The Arabians do not 
get any of these, except the myrrh, without 
trouble. The frankincense they procure by 
means of the gum styrax, which the Greeks ob¬ 
tain from the Phoenicians; this they burn, and 
thereby obtain the spice. For the trees which 
bear the frankincense are guarded by winged 
serpents, small in size, and of varied colours, 
whereof vast numbers hang about every tree. 
They are of the same kind as the serpents that 
invade Egypt; and there is nothing but the 
smoke of the styrax which will drive them 
from the trees. 

108. The Arabians say that the whole world 
would swarm with these serpents, if they were 
not kept in check in the way in which I know 
that vipers are. Of a truth Divine Providence 
does appear to be, as indeed one might expect 
beforehand, a wise contriver. For timid ani¬ 
mals which are a prey to others are all made 
to produce young abundantly, that so the spe¬ 
cies may not be entirely eaten up and lost; 
while savage and noxious creatures are made 
very unfruitful. The hare, for instance, which 

is hunted alike by beasts, birds, and men, c 





103-114] the history 113 


breeds so abundandy as even to superfetate, a 
thing which is true of no other animal. You 
find in a hare’s belly, at one and the same time, 
some of the young all covered with fur, others 
quite naked, others again just fully formed in 
the womb, while the hare perhaps has lately 
conceived afresh. The lioness, on the other 
hand, which is one of the strongest and boldest 
of brutes, brings forth young but once in her 
lifetime,^ and then a single cub; she cannot pos¬ 
sibly conceive again, since she loses her womb 
at the same time that she drops her young. 
The reason of this is that as soon as the cub 
begins to stir inside the dam, his claws, which 
are sharper than those of any other animal, 
scratch the womb; as the time goes on, and he 
grows bigger, he tears it ever more and more; 
so that at last, when the birth comes, there is 
not a morsel in the whole womb that is sound. 

109. Now with respect to the vipers and the 
winged snakes of Arabia, if they increased as 
fast as their nature would allow, impossible 
were it for man to maintain himself upon the 
earth. Accordingly it is found that when the 
male and female come together, at the very 
moment of impregnation, the female seizes the 
male by the neck, and having once fastened, 
cannot be brought to leave go till she has bit 
the neck entirely through. And so the male 
perishes; but after a while he is revenged upon 
the female by means of the young, which, 
while still unborn, gnaw a passage through 
the womb, and then through the belly of their 
mother, and so make their entrance into the 
world. Contrariwise, other snakes, which are 
harmless, lay eggs, and hatch a vast number of 
young. Vipers are found in all parts of the 
world, but the winged serpents are nowhere 
seen except in Arabia, where they are all con¬ 
gregated together. This makes them appear so 
numerous. 

no. Such, then, is the way in which the 
Arabians obtain their frankincense; their man¬ 
ner of collecting the cassia is the following:— 
They cover all their body and their face with 
the hides of oxen and other skins, leaving only 
holes for the eyes, and thus protected go in 
search of the cassia, which grows in a lake of 
no great depth. All round the shores and in 
the lake itself there dwell a number of winged 
animals, much resembling bats, which screech 
horribly, and are very valiant. These creatures 
they must keep from their eyes all the while 
that they gather the cassia. 

^ The fabulous character of the whole of this ac¬ 
count was known to Aristotle. 


111. Still more wonderful is the mode in 
which they collect the cinnamon. Where the 
wood grows, and what country produces it, 
they cannot tell—only some, following proba¬ 
bility, relate that it comes from the country in 
which Bacchus was brought up. Great birds, 
they say, bring the sticks which we Greeks, 
taking the word from the Phoenicians, call cin¬ 
namon, and carry them up into the air to make 
their nests. These are fastened with a sort of 
mud to a sheer face of rock, where no foot of 
man is able to climb. So the Arabians, to get 
the cinnamon, use the following artifice. They 
cut all the oxen and asses and beasts of burthen 
that die in their land into large pieces, which 
they carry with them into those regions, and 
place near the nests: then they withdraw to a 
distance, and the old birds, swooping down, 
seize the pieces of meat and fly with them up 
to their nests; which, not being able to support 
the weight, break off and fall to the ground. 
Hereupon the Arabians return and collect the 
cinnamon, which is afterwards carried from 
Arabia into other countries. 

112. Ledanum, which the Arabs call lada- 
num, is procured in a yet stranger fashion. 
Found in a most inodorous place, it is the 
sweetest-scented of all substances. It is gathered 
from the beards of he-goats, where it is found 
sticking like gum, having come from the bush¬ 
es on which they browse. It is used in many 
sorts of unguents, and is what the Arabs burn 
chiefly as incense. 

113. Concerning the spices of Arabia let no 
more be said. The whole country is scented 
with them, and exhales an odour marvellously 
sweet. There are also in Arabia two kinds of 
sheep worthy of admiration, the like of which 
is nowhere else to be seen; the one kind has 
long tails, not less than three cubits in length, 
which, if they were allowed to trail on the 
ground, would be bruised and fall into sores. 
As it is, all the shepherds know enough of car¬ 
pentering to make little trucks for their sheep’s 
tails. The trucks are placed under the tails, each 
sheep having one to himself, and the tails are 
then tied down upon them. The other kind 
has a broad tail, which is a cubit across some¬ 
times. 

114^ Where the south declines towards the 
setting sun lies the country called Ethiopia, the 
last inhabited land in that direction. There 
gold is obtained in great plenty, huge elephants 
abound, with wild trees of all sorts, and ebony; 
and the men are taller, handsomer, and longer 
lived than anywhere else. 


114 HERODOTUS T Book iii 


115. Now these are the farthest regions of 
the world in Asia and Libya. Of the extreme 
tracts of Europe towards the west I cannot 
speak with any certainty; for I do not allow 
that there is any river, to which the bar¬ 
barians give the name of Eridanus, emptying 
itself into the northern sea, whence (as the tale 
goes) amber is procured; nor do I know of 
any islands called the Cassiterides (Tin Is¬ 
lands), whence the tin comes which we use. 
For in the first place the name Eridanus is 
manifestly not a barbarian word at all, but a 
Greek name, invented by some poet or other; 
and secondly, though I have taken vast pains, 
I have never been able to get an assurance from 
an eye-witness that there is any sea on the fur¬ 
ther side of Europe. Nevertheless, tin and am¬ 
ber do certainly come to us from the ends of 
the earth. 

116. The northern parts of Europe are very 
much richer in gold than any other region: 
but how it is procured I have no certain knowl¬ 
edge. The story runs that the one-eyed Ari- 
maspi purloin it from the griffins; but here 
too I am incredulous, and cannot persuade my¬ 
self that there is a race of men born with one 
eye, who in all else resemble the rest of man¬ 
kind. Nevertheless it seems to be true that the 
extreme regions of the earth, which surround 
and shut up within themselves all other coun¬ 
tries, produce the things which are the rarest, 
and which men reckon the most beautiful. 

117. There is a plain in Asia which is shut 
in on all sides by a mountain-range, and in this 
mountain-range are five openings. The plain 
lies on the confines of the Chorasmians, Hyr- 
canians, Parthians, Sarangians, and Thamanae- 
ans, and belonged formerly to the first-men¬ 
tioned of those peoples. Ever since the Per¬ 
sians, however, obtained the mastery of Asia, 
it has been the property of the Great King. A 
mighty river, called the Aces, flows from the 
hills inclosing the plain; and this stream, for¬ 
merly splitting into five channels, ran through 
the five openings in the hills, and watered the 
lands of the five nations which dwell around. 
The Persian came, however, and conquered 
the region, and then it went ill with the peo¬ 
ple of these lands. The Great King blocked 
up all the passages between the hills with dykes 
and flood-gates, and so prevented the water 
from flowing out. Then the plain within the 
hills became a sea, for the river kept rising, and 
the water could find no outlet. From that time 
the five nations which were wont formerly to 
have the use of the stream, losing their accus¬ 


tomed supply of water, have been in great dis¬ 
tress. In winter, indeed, they have rain from 
heaven like the rest of the world, but in sum¬ 
mer, after sowing their millet and their sesame, 
they always stand in need of water from the 
river. When, therefore, they suffer from this 
want, hastening to Persia, men and women 
alike, they take their station at the gate of the 
king’s palace, and wail aloud. Then the king 
orders the flood-gates to be opened towards the 
country whose need is greatest, and lets the i 
soil drink until it has had enough; after which 
the gates on this side are shut, and others are 
unclosed for the nation which, of the remain- \ 
der, needs it most. It has been told me that the 1 
king never gives the order to open the gates ^ 
till the suppliants have paid him a large sum { 
of money over and above the tribute. j 

118. Of the seven Persians who rose up 
against the Magus, one, Intaphernes, lost his , 
life very shortly after the outbreak, for an act |« 
of insolence. He wished to enter the palace and 1 
transact a certain business with the king. Now i 
the law was that all those who had taken part I 
in the rising against the Magus might enter ^ 
unannounced into the king’s presence, unless h 
he happened to be in private with his wife. So I 
Intaphernes would not have any one announce 
him, but, as he belonged to the seven, claimed 

it as his right to go in. The doorkeeper, how¬ 
ever, and the chief usher forbade his entrance, 
since the king, they said, was with his wife. 
But Intaphernes thought they told lies; so, . 
drawing his scymitar, he cut off their noses and 
their ears, and, hanging them on the bridle of 
his horse, put the bridle round their necks, and 
so let them go. 

119. Then these two men went and showed 
themselves to the king, and told him how it 
had come to pass that they were thus treated. 
Darius trembled lest it was by the common 
consent of the six that the deed had been done; 
he therefore sent for them all in turn, and 
sounded them to know if they approved the 
conduct of Intaphernes. When he found by 
their answers that there had been no concert be¬ 
tween him and them, he laid hands on Intaph¬ 
ernes, his children, and all his near kindred; 
strongly suspecting that he and his friends 
were about to raise a revolt. When all had been 
seized and put in chains, as malefactors con¬ 
demned to death, the wife of Intaphernes came 
and stood continually at the palace-gates, weep¬ 
ing and wailing sore. So Darius after a while, 
seeing that she never ceased to stand and weep, 
was touched with pity for her, and bade a mes- 






115-1231 the history 115 


senger go to her and say, “Lady, king Darius 
gives thee as a boon the life of one of thy kins¬ 
men—choose which thou wilt of the prison¬ 
ers.” Then she pondered awhile before she an¬ 
swered, “If the king grants me the life of one 
alone, I make choice of my brother.” Darius, 
when he heard the reply, was astonished, and 
sent again, saying, “Lady, the king bids thee 
tell him why it is that thou passest by thy hus¬ 
band and thy children, and preferrest to have 
the life of thy brother spared. He is not so near 
to thee as thy children, nor so dear as thy hus¬ 
band.” She answered, “O king, if the gods will, 
I may have another husband and other chil¬ 
dren when these are gone. But as my father 
and my mother are no more, it is impossible 
that I should have another brother. This was 
my thought when I asked to have my brother 
spared.” Then it seemed to Darius that the 
lady spoke well, and he gave her, besides the 
life that she had asked, the life also of her eld¬ 
est son, because he was greatly pleased with 
her. But he slew all the rest. Thus one of the 
seven died, in the way I have described, very 
shortly after the insurrection. 

120. About the time of Cambyses’ last sick¬ 
ness, the following events happened. There 
was a certain Oroetes, a Persian, whom Cyrus 
had made governor of Sardis. This man con¬ 
ceived a most unholy wish. He had never suf¬ 
fered wrong or had an ill word from Polycrates 
the Samian—nay, he had not so much as seen 
him in all his life; yet, notwithstanding, he 
conceived the wish to seize him and put him 
to death. This wish, according to the account 
which the most part give, arose from what hap¬ 
pened one day as he was sitting with another 
Persian in the gate of the king’s palace. The 
man’s name was Mitrobates, and he was ruler 
of the satrapy of Dascyleium. He and Orcetes 
had been talking together, and from talking 
they fell to quarrelling and comparing their 
merits; whereupon Mitrobates said to Oroetes 
reproachfully, “Art thou worthy to be called a 
man, when, near as Samos lies to thy govern¬ 
ment, and easy as it is to conquer, thou hast 
omitted to bring it under the dominion of the 
king.? Easy to conquer, said L? Why, a mere 
common citizen, with the help of fifteen men- 
at-arms, mastered the island, and is still king 
of it.” Oroetes, they say, took this reproach 
greatly to heart; but, instead of seeking to re¬ 
venge himself on the man by whom it was ut¬ 
tered, he conceived the desire of destroying 
Polycrates, since it was on Polycrates’ account 
that the reproach had fallen on him. 


121. Another less common version of the 
story is that Oroetes sent a herald to Samos to 
make a request, the nature of which is not stat¬ 
ed; Polycrates was at the time reclining in the 
apartment of the males, and Anacreon the Te- 
ian was with him; when therefore the herald 
came forward to converse. Polycrates, either 
out of studied contempt for the power of Oroe- 
tes, or it may be merely by chance, was lying 
with his face turned away towards the wall; 
and so he lay all the time that the herald spake, 
and when he ended, did not even vouchsafe 
him a word. 

122. Such are the two reasons alleged for the 
death of Polycrates; it is open to all to believe 
which they please. What is certain is that Ores¬ 
tes, while residing at Magnesia on the Masan- 
der, sent a Lydian, by name Myrsus, the son 
of Gyges, with a message to Polycrates at Sa¬ 
mos, well knowing what that monarch de¬ 
signed. For Polycrates entertained a design 
which no other Greek, so far as we know, ever 
formed before him, unless it were Minos the 
Cnossian, and those (if there were any such) 
who had the mastery of the Egasan at an earli¬ 
er time—Polycrates, I say, was the first of mere 
human birth who conceived the design of 
gaining the empire of the sea, and aspired to 
rule over Ionia and the islands. Knowing then 
that Polycrates was thus minded, Oroetes sent 
his message, which ran as follows:— 

“Oroetes to Polycrates thus sayeth: I hear thou 
raisest thy thoughts high, but thy means are 
not equal to thy ambition. Listen then to my 
words, and learn how thou mayest at once 
serve thyself and preserve me. King Cambyses 
is bent on my destruction—of this I have warn¬ 
ing from a sure hand. Come thou, therefore, 
and fetch me away, me and all my wealth— 
share my wealth with me, and then, so far as 
money can aid, thou mayest make thyself mas¬ 
ter of the whole of Greece. But if thou doubt- 
est of my wealth, send the trustiest of thy fol¬ 
lowers, and I will show my treasures to him.” 

123. Polycrates, when he heard this message, 
was full of joy, and straightway approved the 
terms; but, as money was what he chiefly de¬ 
sired, before stirring in the business he sent his 
secretary, Maeandrius, son of Maeandrius, a Sa¬ 
mian,-to look into the matter. This was the 
man who, not very long afterwards, made an 
offering at the temple of Juno of all the furni¬ 
ture which had adorned the male apartments 
in the palace of Polycrates, an offering well 
worth seeing. Oroetes learning that one was 
coming to view his treasures, contrived as fol- 




116 HERODOTUS [Book hi 


lows:—he filled eight great chests almost brim¬ 
ful of stones, and then covering over the stones 
with gold, corded the chests, and so held them 
in readiness. When Ma*andrius arrived, he was 
shown this as Oroetes’ treasure, and having 
seen it returned to Samos. 

124. On hearing his account. Polycrates, 
notwithstanding many warnings given him by 
the soothsayers, and much dissuasion of his 
friends, made ready to go in person. Even the 
dream which visited his daughter failed to 
check him. She had dreamed that she saw her 
father hanging high in air, washed by Jove, and 
anointed by the sun. Having therefore thus 
dreamed, she used every efiort to prevent her 
father from going; even as he went on board 
his penteconter crying after him with words of 
evil omen. Then Polycrates threatened her 
that, if he returned in safety, he would keep 
her unmarried many years. She answered, 
“Oh! that he might perform his threat; far 
better for her to remain long unmarried than 
to be bereft of her father!” 

125. Polycrates, however, making light of 
all the counsel offered him, set sail and went 
to Oroetes. Many friends accompanied him; 
among the rest, Democedes, the son of Calli- 
phon, a native of Crotona, who was a physi¬ 
cian, and the best skilled in his art of all men 
then living. Polycrates, on his arrival at Mag¬ 
nesia, perished miserably, in a way unworthy 
of his rank and of his lofty schemes. For, if we 
except the Syracusans, there has never been 
one of the Greek tyrants who was to be com¬ 
pared with Polycrates for magnificence. Oroe¬ 
tes, however, slew him in a mode which is not 
fit to be described, and then hung his dead 
body upon a cross. His Samian followers Oroe¬ 
tes let go free, bidding them thank him that 
they were allowed their liberty; the rest, who 
were in part slaves, in part free foreigners, he 
alike treated as his slaves by conquest. Then 
was the dream of the daughter of Polycrates 
fulfilled; for Polycrates, as he hung upon the 
cross, and rain fell on him, was washed by Ju¬ 
piter; and he was anointed by the sun, when 
his own moisture overspread his body. And so 
the vast good fortune of Polycrates came at last 
to the end which Amasis the Egyptian king 
had prophesied in days gone by. 

126. It was not long before retribution for 
the murder of Polycrates overtook Oroetes. 
After the death of Cambyses, and during all the 
time that the Magus sat upon the throne, Oroe¬ 
tes remained in Sardis, and brought no help 
to the Persians, whom the Medes had robbed 


of the sovereignty. On the contrary, amid the 
troubles of this season, he slew Mitrobates, the 
satrap of Dascyleium, who had cast the re¬ 
proach upon him in the matter of Polycrates; 
and he slew also Mitrobates’s son, Cranaspes 
—both men of high repute among the Per¬ 
sians. He was likewise guilty of many other j 
acts of insolence; among the rest, of the follow- i 
ing:—there was a courier sent to him by Da- I 
rius whose message was not to his mind— | 
Oroetes had him waylaid and murdered on his j 
road back to the king; the man and his horse | 
both disappeared, and no traces were left of [ 
either. j 

127. Darius therefore was no sooner settled 
upon the throne than he longed to take ven¬ 
geance upon Oroetes for all his misdoings, and j 
especially for the murder of Mitrobates and his j 
son. To send an armed force openly against | 
him, however, he did not think advisable, as j 
the whole kingdom was still unsettled, and he 
too was but lately come to the throne, while 
Oroetes, as he understood, had a great power. 

In truth a thousand Persians attended on him 
as a bodyguard, and he held the satrapies of 
Phrygia, Lydia, and Ionia. Darius therefore 
proceeded by artifice. He called together a 
meeting of all the chief of the Persians, and 
thus addressed them:—“Who among you, O 
Persians, will undertake to accomplish me a 
matter by skill without force or tumult.'^ Force 

is misplaced where the work wants skilful 
management. Who, then, will undertake to 
bring me Oroetes alive, or else to kill him.^^ He 
never did the Persians any good in his life, and 
he has wrought us abundant injury. Two of 
our number, Mitrobates and his son, he has 
slain; and when messengers go to recall him, 
even though they have their mandate from 
me, with an insolence which is not to be en¬ 
dured, he puts them to death. We must kill this 
man, therefore, before he does the Persians any 
greater hurt.” 

128. Thus spoke Darius; and straightway 
thirty of those present came forward and of¬ 
fered themselves for the work. As they strove 
together, Darius interfered, and bade them 
have recourse to the lot. Accordingly lots were 
cast, and the task fell to Bagaeus, son of Ar- 
tontes. Then Bagaeus caused many letters to be 
written on divers matters, and sealed them all 
with the king’s signet; after which he took the 
letters with him, and departed for Sardis. On 
his arrival he was shown into the presence of 
Orates, when he uncovered the letters one by 
one, and giving them to the king’s secretary— 




124 - 132 J THE HISTORY 117 


every satrap has with him a king’s secretary— 
commanded him to read their contents. Here¬ 
in his design was to try the fidelity of the body¬ 
guard, and to see if they would be likely to fall 
away from Orcetes. When therefore he saw 
that they showed the letters all due respect, and 
even more highly reverenced their contents, he 
gave the secretary a paper in which was writ¬ 
ten, “Persians, king Darius forbids you to 
guard Orcetes.” The soldiers at these words 
laid aside their spears. So Bagaeus, finding that 
they obeyed this mandate, took courage, and 
gave into the secretary’s hands the last letter, 
wherein it was written, ‘‘King Darius com¬ 
mands the Persians who are in Sardis to kill 
Orcetes.” Then the guards drew their swords 
and slew him upon the spot. Thus did retribu¬ 
tion for the murder of Polycrates the Samian 
overtake Orates the Persian. 

129. Soon after the treasures of Orcetes had 
been conveyed to Sardis it happened that king 
Darius, as he leaped from his horse during the 
chase, sprained his foot. The sprain was one of 
no common severity, for the ankle-bone was 
forced quite out of the socket. Now Darius al¬ 
ready had at his court certain Egyptians whom 
he reckoned the best-skilled physicians in all 
the world; to their aid, therefore, he had re¬ 
course; but they twisted the foot so clumsily, 
and used such violence, that they only made 
the mischief greater. For seven days and seven 
nights the king lay without sleep, so grievous 
was the pain he suffered. On the eighth day of 
his indisposition, one who had heard before 
leaving Sardis of the skill of Democedes the 
Crotoniat, told Darius, who commanded that 
he should be brought with all speed into his 
presence. When, therefore, they had found him 
among the slaves of Orcetes, quite uncared for 
by any one, they brought him just as he was, 
clanking his fetters, and all clothed in rags, 
before the king. 

130. As soon as he was entered into the 
presence, Darius asked him if he knew medi¬ 
cine—to which he answered “No,” for he 
feared that if he made himself known he 
would lose all chance of ever again beholding 
Greece. Darius, however, perceiving that he 
dealt deceitfully, and really understood the art, 
bade those who had brought him to the pres¬ 
ence go fetch the scourges and the pricking- 
irons. Upon this Democedes made confession, 
but at the same time said, that he had no thor¬ 
ough knowledge of medicine—he had but 
lived some time with a physician, and in this 
way had gained a slight smattering of the art. 


However, Darius put himself under his care, 
and Democedes, by using the remedies cus¬ 
tomary among the Greeks, and exchanging the 
violent treatment of the Egyptians for milder 
means, first enabled him to get some sleep, and 
then in a very little time restored him alto¬ 
gether, after he had quite lost the hope of ever 
having the use of his foot. Hereupon the king 
presented Democedes with two sets of fetters 
wrought in gold; so Democedes asked if he 
meant to double his sufferings because he had 
brought him back to health? Darius was 
pleased at the speech, and bade the eunuchs 
take Democedes to see his wives, which they 
did accordingly, telling them all that this was 
the man who had saved the king’s life. Then 
each of the wives dipped with a saucer into a 
chest of gold, and gave so bountifully to Dem¬ 
ocedes, that a slave named Sciton, who fol¬ 
lowed him, and picked up the staters^ which 
fell from the saucers, gathered together a great 
heap of gold. 

131. This Democedes left his country and 
became attached to Polycrates in the following 
way:—His father, who dwelt at Crotona, was 
a man of a savage temper, and treated him 
cruelly. When, therefore, he could no longer 
bear such constant ill-usage, Democedes left 
his home, and sailed away to Egina. There he 
set up in business, and succeeded the first year 
in surpassing all the best-skilled physicians of 
the place, notwithstanding that he was without 
instruments, and had with him none of the ap¬ 
pliances needful for the practice of his art. In 
the second year the state of Egina hired his 
services at the price of a talent; in the third the 
Athenians engaged him at a hundred minse; 
and in the fourth Polycrates at two talents. So 
he went to Samos, and there took up his abode. 
It was in no small measure from his success 
that the Crotoniats came to be reckoned such 
good physicians; for about this period the phy¬ 
sicians of Crotona had the name of being the 
best, and those of Gyrene the second best, in all 
Greece. The Argives, about the same time, 
were thought to be the first musicians in 
Greece. 

132. After Democedes had cured Darius at 
Susa, he dwelt there in a large house, and 
feasted daily at the king’s table, nor did he 
lack anything that his heart desired, excepting 
liberty to return to his country. By interceding 
for them with Darius, he saved the lives of the 
Egyptian physicians who had had the care of 
the king before he came, when they were about 

^ A stater was worth ^5.72. 




118 HERODOTUS [Book hi i 


to be impaled because they had been surpassed 
by a Greek; and further, he succeeded in rescu¬ 
ing an Elean soothsayer, who had followed the 
fortunes of Polycrates, and was lying in utter 
neglect among his slaves. In short there was no 
one who stood so high as Democedes in the 
favour of the king. 

133. Moreover, within a little while it hap¬ 
pened that Atossa, the daughter of Cyrus, who 
was married to Darius, had a boil form upon 
her breast, which, after it burst, began to 
spread and increase. Now so long as the sore 
was of no great size, she hid it through shame 
and made no mention of it to any one; but 
when it became worse, she sent at last for 
Democedes, and showed it to him. Democedes 
said that he would make her well, but she must 
first promise him with an oath that if he cured 
her she would grant him whatever request he 
might prefer; assuring her at the same time 
that it should be nothing which she could 
blush to hear. 

134. On these terms Democedes applied his 
art, and soon cured the abscess; and Atossa, 
when she had heard his request, spake thus 
one night to Darius:— 

“It seemeth to me strange, my lord, that, with 
the mighty power which is thine, thou sittest 
idle, and neither makest any conquest, nor ad- 
vancest the power of the Persians. Methinks 
that one who is so young, and so richly en¬ 
dowed with wealth, should perform some no¬ 
ble achievement to prove to the Persians that 
it is a man who governs them. Another reason, 
too, should urge thee to attempt some enter¬ 
prise. Not only does it befit thee to show the 
Persians that a man rules them, but for thy 
own peace thou shouldest waste their strength 
in wars lest idleness breed revolt against thy 
authority. Now, too, whilst thou art still young, 
thou mayest well accomplish some exploit; for 
as the body grows in strength the mind too 
ripens, and as the body ages, the mind's pow¬ 
ers decay, till at last it becomes dulled to every¬ 
thing.” 

So spake Atossa, as Democedes had instruct¬ 
ed her. Darius answered:—“Dear lady, thou 
hast uttered the very thoughts that occupy my 
brain. I am minded to construct a bridge which 
shall join our continent with the other, and 
so carry war into Scythia. Yet a brief space and 
all will be accomplished as thou desirest.” 

But Atossa rejoined:—“Look now, this war 
with Scythia were best reserved awhile—for 
the Scythians may be conquered at any time. 
Prithee, lead me thy host first into Greece. I 


long to be served by some of those Lacedae¬ 
monian maids of whom I have heard so much. 

I want also Argive, and Athenian, and Corin¬ 
thian women. There is now at the court a man 
who can tell thee better than any one else in the 
whole world whatever thou wouldst know con¬ 
cerning Greece, and who might serve thee 
right well as guide; I mean him who per¬ 
formed the cure on thy foot.” 

“Dear lady,” Darius answered, “since it is 
thy wish that we try first the valour of the » 
Greeks, it were best, methinks, before march¬ 
ing against them, to send some Persians to spy , 
out the land; they may go in company with 
the man thou mentionest, and when they have | 
seen and learnt all, they can bring us back a , 
full report. Then, having a more perfect | 
knowledge of them, I will begin the war.” [] 

135. Darius, having so spoke, put no long ■ 
distance between the word and the deed, but , 
as soon as day broke he summoned to his pres¬ 
ence fifteen Persians of note, and bade them 1 
take Democedes for their guide, and explore 1 1 
the sea-coasts of Greece. Above all, they were | 
to be sure to bring Democedes back with them, ' 1 
and not suffer him to run away and escape. | 
After he had given these orders, Darius sent 
for Democedes, and besought him to serve as 
guide to the Persians, and when he had shown 
them the whole of Greece to come back to | 
Persia. He should take, he said, all the valu- | 
ables he possessed as presents to his father and 
his brothers, and he should receive on his re- 1 
turn a far more abundant store. Moreover, the 
king added, he would give him, as his contri¬ 
bution towards the presents, a merchantship 
laden with all manner of precious things, 
which should accompany him on his voyage. } 
Now I do not believe that Darius, when he 
made these promises, had any guile in his 
heart: Democedes, however, who suspected t 
that the king spoke to try him, took care not to * 
snatch at the offers with any haste; but said, 
“he would leave his own goods behind to en¬ 
joy upon his return—the merchant-ship which 
the king proposed to grant him to carry gifts 1 
to his brothers, that he would accept at the 
king’s hands.” So when Darius had laid his 
orders upon Democedes, he sent him and the 
Persians away to the coast. 

136. The men went down to Phoenicia, to 1 
Sidon, the Phoenician town, where straightway 
they fitted out two triremes and a trading-ves¬ 
sel, which they loaded with all manner of pre- | 
cious merchandise; and, everything being now 
ready, they set sail for Greece. When they had 









133 - 140 ] THE HISTORY 119 


made the land, they kept along the shore and 
examined it, taking notes of all that they saw; 
and in this way they explored the greater por¬ 
tion of the country, and all the most famous 
regions, until at last they reached Tarentum in 
Italy. There Aristophilides, king of the Taren- 
tines, out of kindness to Democedes, took the 
rudders off the Median ships, and detained 
their crews as spies. Meanwhile Democedes es¬ 
caped to Crotona, his native city, whereupon 
Aristophilides released the Persians from pris¬ 
on, and gave their rudders back to them. 

137. The Persians now quitted Tarentum, 
and sailed to Crotona in pursuit of Democedes; 
they found him in the market-place, where 
they straightway laid violent hands on him. 
Some of the Crotoniats, who greatly feared the 
power of the Persians, were willing to give 
him up; but others resisted, held Democedes 
fast, and even struck the Persians with their 
walking-sticks. They, on their part, kept cry¬ 
ing out, “Men of Crotona, beware what you 
do. It is the king’s runaway slave that you are 
rescuing. Think you Darius will tamely sub¬ 
mit to such an insult.^ Think you, that if you 
carry off the man from us, it will hereafter go 
well with you.'^ Will you not rather be the first 
persons on whom we shall make war.^ Will 
not your city be the first we shall seek to lead 
away captive Thus they spake, but the Cro¬ 
toniats did not heed them; they rescued Demo¬ 
cedes, and seized also the trading-ship which 
the Persians had brought with them from 
Phoenicia. Thus robbed, and bereft of their 
guide, the Persians gave up all hope of explor¬ 
ing the rest of Greece, and set sail for Asia. As 
they were departing, Democedes sent to them 
and begged they would inform Darius that the 
daughter of Milo was affianced to him as his 
bride. For the name of Milo the wrestler was 
in high repute with the king. My belief is, that 
Democedes hastened his marriage by the pay¬ 
ment of a large sum of money for the purpose 
of showing Darius that he was a man of mark 
in his own country. 

138. The Persians weighed anchor and left 
Crotona, but, being wrecked on the coast of 
lapygia, were made slaves by the inhabitants. 
From this condition they were rescued by Gil- 
lus, a banished Tarentine, who ransomed them 
at his own cost, and took them back to Darius. 
Darius offered to repay this service by granting 
Gillus whatever boon he chose to ask; where¬ 
upon Gillus told the king of his misfortune, 
and begged to be restored to his country. Fear¬ 
ing, however, that he might bring trouble on 


Greece if a vast armament were sent to Ita^.y 
on his account, he added that it would content 
him if the Cnidians undertook to obtain his 
recall. Now the Cnidians were close friends of 
the Tarentines, which made him think there 
was no likelier means of procuring his return. 
Darius promised and performed his part; for 
he sent a messenger to Cnidus, and command¬ 
ed the Cnidians to restore Gillus. The Cnidi¬ 
ans did as he wished, but found themselves 
unable to persuade the Tarentines, and were 
too weak to attempt force. Such then was the 
course which this matter took. These were the 
first Persians who ever came from Asia to 
Greece; and they were sent to spy out the land 
for the reason which I have before mentioned. 

139. After this, king Darius besieged and 
took Samos, which was the first city, Greek or 
Barbarian, that he conquered. The cause of his 
making war upon Samos was the following:— 
at the time when Cambyses, son of Cyrus, 
marched against Egypt, vast numbers of 
Greeks flocked thither; some, as might have 
been looked for, to push their trade; others, to 
serve in his army; others again, merely to see 
the land: among these last was Syloson, son 
of /Faces, and brother of Polycrates, at that 
time an exile from Samos. This Syloson, dur¬ 
ing his stay in Egypt, met with a singular piece 
of good fortune. He happened one day to put 
on a scarlet cloak, and thus attired to go into 
the market-place at Memphis, when Darius, 
who was one of Cambyses’ bodyguard, and not 
at that time a man of any account, saw him, 
and taking a strong liking to the dress, went up 
and offered to purchase it. Syloson perceived 
how anxious he was, and by a lucky inspira¬ 
tion answered: “There is no price at which I 
would sell my cloak; but I will give it thee for 
nothing, if it must needs be thine.’’ Darius 
thanked him, and accepted the garment. 

140. Poor Syloson felt at the time that he 
had fooled away his cloak in a very simple 
manner; but afterwards, when in the course 
of years Cambyses died, and the seven Persians 
rose in revolt against the Magus, and Darius 
was the man chosen out of the seven to have 
the kingdom, Syloson learnt that the person to 
whom the crown had come was the very man 
who had coveted his cloak in Egypt, and to 
whom he had freely given it. So he made his 
way to Susa, and seating himself at the portal 
of the royal palace, gave out that he was a ben¬ 
efactor of the king. Then the doorkeeper went 
and told Darius. Amazed at what he heard, the 
king said thus within himself:—“What Greek 


120 HERODOTUS [Bookiii 


can have been my benefactor, or to which of 
them do I owe anything, so lately as I have got 
the kingdom? Scarcely a man of them all has 
been here, not more than one or two certainly, 
since I came to the throne. Nor do I remember 
that I am in the debt of any Greek. However, 
bring him in, and let me hear what he means 
by his boast.” So the doorkeeper ushered Sylo- 
son into the presence, and the interpreters 
asked him who he was, and what he had done 
that he should call himself a benefactor of the 
king. Then Syloson told the whole story of the 
cloak, and said that it was he who had made 
Darius the present. Hereupon Darius ex¬ 
claimed, “Oh! thou most generous of men, art 
thou indeed he who, when I had no power at 
all, gavest me something, albeit little? Truly 
the favour is as great as a very grand present 
would be nowadays. I will therefore give thee 
in return gold and silver without stint, that 
thou mayest never repent of having rendered a 
service to Darius, son of Hystaspes.” “Give me 
not, O king,” replied Syloson, “either silver or 
gold, but recover me Samos, my native land, 
and let that be thy gift to me. It belongs now 
to a slave of ours, who, when Oroetes put my 
brother Polycrates to death, became its master. 
Give me Samos, I beg; but give it unharmed, 
with no bloodshed—no leading into captivity.” 

141. When he heard this, Darius sent off an 
army, under Otanes, one of the seven, with 
orders to accomplish all that Syloson had de¬ 
sired. And Otanes went down to the coast and 
made ready to cross over. 

142. The government of Samos was held at 
this time by Maeandrius, son of Maeandrius, 
whom Polycrates had appointed as his deputy. 
This person conceived the wish to act like the 
justest of men, but it was not allowed him to 
do so. On receiving tidings of the death of 
Polycrates, he forthwith raised an altar to Jove 
the Protector of Freedom, and assigned it the 
piece of ground which may still he seen in the 
suburb. This done, he assembled all the citi¬ 
zens, and spoke to them as follows:— 

“Ye know, friends, that the sceptre of Poly¬ 
crates, and all his power, has passed into my 
hands, and if I choose I may rule over you. But 
what I condemn in another I will, if I may, 
avoid myself. I never approved the ambition of 
Polycrates to lord it over men as good as him¬ 
self, nor looked with favour on any of those 
who have done the like. Now therefore, since 
he has fulfilled his destiny, I lay down my 
office, and proclaim equal rights. All that I 
claim in return is six talents from the treasures 


of Polycrates, and the priesthood of Jove the 
Protector of Freedom, for myself and my de¬ 
scendants for ever. Allow me this, as the man 
by whom his temple has been built, and by 
whom ye yourselves are now restored to lib¬ 
erty.” As soon as Maeandrius had ended, one of 
the Samians rose up and said, “As if thou wert 
fit to rule us, base-born and rascal as thou art! 
Think rather of accounting for the monies 
which thou hast fingered.” 

143. The man who thus spoke was a certain 
Telesarchus, one of the leading citizens. Mae- 
andrius, therefore, feeling sure that if he laid 
down the sovereign power some one else 
would become tyrant in his room, gave up the 
thought of relinquishing it. Withdrawing to 
the citadel, he sent for the chief men one by 
one, under pretence of showing them his ac¬ 
counts, and as fast as they came arrested them 
and put them in irons. So these men were 
bound; and Maeandrius within a short time 
fell sick: whereupon Lycaretus, one of his 
brothers, thinking that he was going to die, 
and wishing to make his own accession to the 
throne the easier, slew all the prisoners. It 
seemed that the Samians did not choose to be 
a free people. 

144. When the Persians whose business it 
was to restore Syloson reached Samos, not a 
man was found to lift up his hand against 
them. Maeandrius and his partisans expressed 
themselves willing to quit the island upon cer¬ 
tain terms, and these terms were agreed to by 
Otanes. After the treaty was made, the most 
distinguished of the Persians had their thrones 
brought, and seated themselves over against 
the citadel. 

145. Now the king Maeandrius had a light¬ 
headed brother—Charilaiis by name—whom 
for some oHence or other he had shut up in 
prison: this man heard what was going on, and 
peering through his bars, saw the Persians 
sitting peacefully upon their seats, whereupon 
he exclaimed aloud, and said he must speak 
with Maeandrius. When this was reported to 
him, Mcxandrius gave orders that Charilaiis 
should be released from prison and brought 
into his presence. No sooner did he arrive than 
he began reviling and abusing his brother, and 
strove to persuade him to attack the Persians. 
“Thou meanest-spirited of men,” he said, 
“thou canst keep me, thy brother, chained in a 
dungeon, notwithstanding that I have done 
nothing worthy of bonds; but when the Per¬ 
sians come and drive thee forth a houseless 
wanderer from thy native land, thou lookest 



141 - 152 ] THE HISTORY 121 


on, and hast not the heart to seek revenge, 
though they might so easily be subdued. If 
thou, however, art afraid, lend me thy soldiers, 
and I will make them pay dearly for their com¬ 
ing here. I engage too to send thee first safe 
out of the island.” 

146. So spake Charilaiis, and Maeandrius 
gave consent; not (I believe) that he was so 
void of sense as to imagine that his own forces 
could overcome those of the king, but because 
he was jealous of Syloson, and did not wish 
him to get so quietly an unharmed city. He 
desired therefore to rouse the anger of the Per¬ 
sians against Samos, that so he might deliver it 
up to Syloson with its power at the lowest pos¬ 
sible ebb; for he knew well that if the Persians 
met with a disaster they would be furious 
against the Samians, while he himself felt 
secure of a retreat at any time that he liked, 
since he had a secret passage under ground 
leading from the citadel to the sea. Maeandrius 
accordingly took ship and sailed away from 
Samos; and Charilaiis, having armed all the 
mercenaries, threw open the gates, and fell 
upon the Persians, who looked for nothing 
less, since they supposed that the whole matter 
had been arranged by treaty. At the first on¬ 
slaught therefore all the Persians of most note, 
men who were in the habit of using litters, 
were slain by the mercenaries; the rest of the 
army, however, came to the rescue, defeated 
the mercenaries, and drove them back into the 
citadel. 

147. Then Otanes, the general, when he saw 
the great calamity which had befallen the Per¬ 
sians, made up his mind to forget the orders 
which Darius had given him, “not to kill or 
enslave a single Samian, but to deliver up the 
island unharmed to Syloson,” and gave the 
word to his army that they should slay the Sa¬ 
mians, both men and boys, wherever they 
could find them. Upon this some of his troops 
laid siege to the citadel, while others began the 

I massacre, killing all they met, some outside, 
j some inside the temples. 

j 148. Maeandrius fled from Samos to Lacedae- 
I mon, and conveyed thither all the riches which 
I he had brought away from the island, after 
j which he acted as follows. Having placed upon 
( his board all the gold and silver vessels that he 
^ had, and bade his servants employ themselves 
in cleaning them, he himself went and entered 
into conversation with Cleomenes, son of Ana- 
xandridas, king of Sparta, and as they talked 
brought him along to his house. There Cleo¬ 
menes, seeing the plate, was filled with wonder 


and astonishment; whereon the other begged 
that he would carry home with him any of the 
vessels that he liked. Mxandrius said this two 
or three times; but Cleomenes here displayed 
surpassing honesty. He refused the gift, and 
thinking that if Maeandrius made the same 
offers to others he would get the aid he sought, 
the Spartan king went straight to the ephors 
and told them “it would be best for Sparta 
that the Samian stranger should be sent away 
from the Peloponnese; for otherwise he might 
perchance persuade himself or some other 
Spartan to be base.” The ephors took his ad¬ 
vice, and let M^eandrius know by a herald that 
he must leave the city. 

149. Meanwhile the Persians netted Samos, 
and delivered it up to Syloson, stripped of all 
its men. After some time, however, this same 
general Otanes was induced to repeople it by 
a dream which he had, and a loathsome disease 
that seized on him. 

150. After the armament of Otanes had set 
sail for Samos, the Babylonians revolted, hav¬ 
ing made every preparation for defence. Dur¬ 
ing all the time that the Magus was king, and 
while the seven were conspiring, they had 
profited by the troubles, and had made them¬ 
selves ready against a siege. And it happened 
somehow or other that no one perceived what 
they were doing. At last when the time came 
for rebelling openly, they did as follows:— 
having first set apart their mothers, each man 
chose besides out of his whole household one 
woman, whomsoever he pleased; these alone 
were allowed to live, while all the rest were 
brought to one place and strangled. The wom¬ 
en chosen were kept to make bread for the 
men; while the others were strangled that they 
might not consume the stores. 

151. When tidings reached Darius of what 
had happened, he drew together all his power, 
and began the war by marching straight upon 
Babylon, and laying siege to the place. The 
Babylonians, however, cared not a whit for his 
siege. Mounting upon the battlements that 
crowned their walls, they insulted and jeered at 
Darius and his mighty host. One even shouted 
to them and said, “Why sit ye there, Persians? 
why do ye not go back to your homes? Till 
mules foal ye will not take our city.” This was 
said by a Babylonian who thought that a mule 
would never foal. 

152. Now when a year and seven months 
had passed, Darius and his army were quite 
wearied out, finding that they could not any¬ 
how take the city. All stratagems and all arts 





122 

had been used, and yet the king could not pre¬ 
vail—not even when he tried the means by 
which Cyrus made himself master of the place. 
The Babylonians were ever upon the watch, 
and he found no way of conquering them. 

153. At last, in the twentieth month, a mar¬ 
vellous thing happened to Zopyrus, son of the 
Megabyzus who was among the seven men 
that overthrew the Magus. One of his sumpter- 
mules gave birth to a foal. Zopyrus, when they 
told him, not thinking that it could be true, 
went and saw the colt with his own eyes; after 
which he commanded his servants to tell no 
one what had come to pass, while he himself 
pondered the matter. Calling to mind then the 
words of the Babylonian at the beginning of 
the siege, “Till mules foal ye shall not take our 
city”—he thought, as he reflected on this 
speech, that Babylon might now be taken. For 
it seemed to him that there was a Divine Prov¬ 
idence in the man having used the phrase, and 
then his mule having foaled. 

154. As soon therefore as he felt within him¬ 
self that Babylon was fated to be taken, he 
went to Darius and asked him if he set a very 
high value on its conquest. When he found 
that Darius did indeed value it highly, he con¬ 
sidered further with himself how he might 
make the deed his own, and be the man to take 
Babylon. Noble exploits in Persia are ever 
highly honoured and bring their authors to 
greatness. He therefore revievved all ways of 
bringing the city under, but found none by 
which he could hope to prevail, unless he 
maimed himself and then went over to the 
enemy. To do this seeming to him a light mat¬ 
ter, he mutilated himself in a way that was 
utterly without remedy. For he cut off his own 
nose and ears, and then, clipping his hair close 
and flogging himself with a scourge, he came 
in this plight before Darius. 

155. Wrath stirred within the king at the 
sight of a man of his lofty rank in such a con¬ 
dition; leaping down from his throne, he ex¬ 
claimed aloud, and asked Zopyrus who it was 
that had disfigured him, and what he had done 
to be so treated. Zopyrus answered, “There is 
not a man in the world, but thou, O king, that 
could reduce me to such a plight—no strang¬ 
er’s hands have wrought this work on me, but 
my own only. I maimed myself because I could 
not endure that the Assyrians should laugh at 
the Persians.” “Wretched man,” said Darius, 
“thou coverest the foulest deed with the fairest 
possible name, when thou sayest thy maiming 
is to help our siege forward. How will thy dis- 


[ Book hi 

figurement, thou simpleton, induce the enemy 
to yield one day the sooner.^ Surely thou hadst 
gone out of thy mind when thou didst so mis¬ 
use thyself.” “Had I told thee,” rejoined the 
other, “what I was bent on doing, thou would- 
est not have suffered it; as it is, I kept my own 
counsel, and so accomplished my plans. Now, 
therefore, if there be no failure on thy part, we 
shall take Babylon. I will desert to the enemy 
as I am, and when I get into their city I will 
tell them that it is by thee I have been thus 
treated. I think they will believe my words, 
and entrust me with a command of troops. 
Thou, on thy part, must wait till the tenth day 
after I am entered within the town, and then 
place near to the gates of Semiramis a detach¬ 
ment of thy army, troops for whose loss thou 
wilt care little, a thousand men. Wait, after 
that, seven days, and post me another detach¬ 
ment, two thousand strong, at the Nineveh 
gates; then let twenty days pass, and at the end 
of that time station near the Chaldaean gates 
a body of four thousand. Let neither these nor 
the former troops be armed with any weapons 
but their swords—those thou mayest leave 
them. After the twenty days are over, bid thy 
whole army attack the city on ev:.:y side, and 
put me two bodies of Persians, one at the Be- 
lian, the other at the Cissian gates; for I expect, 
that, on account of my successes, the Baby¬ 
lonians will entrust everything, even the keys 
of their gates, to me. Then it will be for me 
and my Persians to do the rest.” 

156. Having left these instructions, Zopyrus 
fled towards the gates of the town, often look¬ 
ing back, to give himself the air of a deserter. 
The men upon the towers, whose business it 
was to keep a lookout, observing him, has¬ 
tened down, and setting one of the gates slight¬ 
ly ajar, questioned him who he was, and on 
what errand he had come. He replied that he 
was Zopyrus, and had deserted to them from 
the Persians. Then the doorkeepers, when they 
heard this, carried him at once before the Mag¬ 
istrates. Introduced into the assembly, he be¬ 
gan to bewail his misfortunes, telling them 
that Darius had maltreated him in the way 
they could see, only because he had given ad¬ 
vice that the siege should be raised, since there 
seemed no hope of taking the city. “And now,” 
he went on to say, “my coming to you, Baby¬ 
lonians, will prove the greatest gain that you 
could possibly receive, while to Darius and the 
Persians it will be the severest loss. Verily he 
by whom I have been so mutilated shall not 
escape unpunished. And truly all the paths of 


HERODOTUS 



i53-i6o] the history 123 


his counsels are known to me.” Thus did Zopy- 
rus speak. 

157. The Babylonians, seeing a Persian of 
such exalted rank in so grievous a plight, his 
nose and ears cut oB, his body red with marks 
of scourging and with blood, had no suspicion 
but that he spoke the truth, and was really 
come to be their friend and helper. They were 
ready, therefore, to grant him anything that he 
asked; and on his suing for a command, they 
entrusted to him a body of troops, with the help 
of which he proceeded to do as he had ar¬ 
ranged with Darius. On the tenth day after his 
flight he led out his detachment, and surround¬ 
ing the thousand men, whom Darius accord¬ 
ing to agreement had sent first, he fell upon 
them and slew them all. Then the Babylonians, 
seeing that his deeds were as brave as his 
words, were beyond measure pleased, and set 
no bounds to their trust. He waited, however, 
and when the next period agreed on had 
elapsed, again with a band of picked men he 
sallied forth, and slaughtered the two thou¬ 
sand. After this second exploit, his praise was 
in all mouths. Once more, however, he waited 
till the interval appointed had gone by, and 
then leading the troops to the place where the 
four thousand were, he put them also to the 
sword. This last victory gave the finishing 
stroke to his power, and made him all in all 
with the Babylonians: accordingly they com¬ 
mitted to him the command of their whole 
army, and put the keys of their city into his 
hands. 

158. Darius now, still keeping to the plan 
agreed upon, attacked the walls on every side, 
whereupon Zopyrus played out the remainder 
of his stratagem. While the Babylonians, 
crowding to the walls, did their best to resist 
the Persian assault, he threw open the Cissian 
and the Behan gates, and admitted the enemy. 


Such of the Babylonians as witnessed the 
treachery, took refuge in the temple of Jupiter 
Belus; the rest, who did not see it, kept at their 
posts, till at last they too learnt that they were 
betrayed. 

159. Thus was Babylon taken for the sec¬ 
ond time. Darius having become master of the 
place, destroyed the wall, and tore down all the 
gates; for Cyrus had done neither the one nor 
the other when he took Babylon. He then chose 
out near three thousand of the leading citizens, 
and caused them to be crucified, while he al¬ 
lowed the remainder still to inhabit the city. 
Further, wishing to prevent the race of the 
Babylonians from becoming extinct, he provid¬ 
ed wives for them in the room of those whom 
(as I explained before) they strangled, to save 
their stores. These he levied from the nations 
bordering on Babylonia, who were each re¬ 
quired to send so large a number to Babylon, 
that in all there were collected no fewer than 
fifty thousand. It is from these women that the 
Babylonians of our times are sprung. 

160. As for Zopyrus, he was considered by 
Darius to have surpassed, in the greatness of 
his achievements, all other Persians, whether of 
former or of later times, except only Cyrus— 
with whom no Persian ever yet thought him¬ 
self worthy to compare. Darius, as the story 
goes, would often say that “he had rather Zopy¬ 
rus were unmaimed, than be master of twen¬ 
ty more Babylons.” And he honoured Zopyrus 
greatly; year by year he presented him with all 
the gifts which are held in most esteem among 
the Persians; he gave him likewise the govern¬ 
ment of Babylon for his life, free from tribute; 
and he also granted him many other favours. 
Megabyzus, who held the command in Egypt 
against the Athenians and their allies, was a son 
of this Zopyrus. And Zopyrus, who fled from 
Persia to Athens, was a son of this Megabyzus. 

