
The First Book, Entitled 
CLIO 


These are the researches of Herodotus of Halicarnassus, which he publishes, 
in the hope of thereby preserving from decay the remembrance of what men 
have done, and of preventing the great and wonderful actions of the Greeks 
and the Barbarians from losing their due meed of glory; and withal to put on 
record what were their grounds of feud. 


I. According to the Persians best informed in 
history, the Phcenicians began to quarrel. This 
people, who had formerly dwelt on the shores 
of the Erythraean Sea,* having migrated to the 
Mediterranean and settled in the parts which 
they now inhabit, began at once, they say, to 
adventure on long voyages, freighting their 
vessels with the wares of Egypt and Assyria. 
They landed at many places on the coast, and 
among the rest at Argos, which was then pre¬ 
eminent above all the states included now un¬ 
der the common name of Hellas.^ Here they 
exposed their merchandise, and traded with 
the natives for five or six days; at the end of 
which time, when almost everything was sold, 
there came down to the beach a number of 
women, and among them the daughter of the 
king, who was, they say, agreeing in this with 
the Greeks, lo, the child of Inachus. The 
women were standing by the stern of the ship 
intent upon their purchases, when the Phceni- 
cians, with a general shout, rushed upon them. 
The greater part made their escape, but some 
were seized and carried off. lo herself was 
among the captives. The Phcenicians put the 
women on board their vessel, and set sail for 

* The Indian Ocean, or rather both the Indian 
Ocean and the Persian Gulf, which latter Herod¬ 
otus does not consider distinct from the Ocean, 
being ignorant of its shape. 

^ The ancient superiority of Argos is indicated 
by the position of Agamemnon at the time of the 
Trojan war and by the use of the word Argive in 
Homer for Greek generally. No other name of a 
single people is used in the same generic way. 


Egypt. Thus did lo pass into Egypt, according 
to the Persian story, which differs widely from 
the Phoenician: and thus commenced, accord¬ 
ing to their authors, the series of outrages. 

2. At a later period, certain Greeks, with 
whose name they are unacquainted, but who 
would probably be Cretans, made a landing at 
Tyre, on the Phoenician coast, and bore off the 
king’s daughter, Europe. In this they only re¬ 
taliated; but afterwards the Greeks, they say, 
were guilty of a second violence. They manned 
a ship of war, and sailed to ^Ea, a city of Col¬ 
chis, on the river Phasis; from whence, after 
despatching the rest of the business on which 
they had come, they carried off Medea, the 
daughter of the king of the land. The monarch 
sent a herald into Greece to demand reparation 
of the wrong, and the restitution of his child; 
but the Greeks made answer that, having re¬ 
ceived no reparation of the wrong done them 
in the seizure of lo the Argive, they should 
give none in this instance. 

3. In the next generation afterwards, accord¬ 
ing to the same authorities, Alexander the son 
of Priam, bearing these events in mind, re¬ 
solved to procure himself a wife out of Greece 
by violence, fully persuaded, that as the Greeks 
had not given satisfaction for their outrages, so 
neither would he be forced to make any for 
his. Accordingly he made prize of Helen; upon 
which the Greeks decided that, before resort¬ 
ing to other measures, they would send envoys 
to reclaim the princess and require reparation 
of the wrong. Their demands were met by a 
reference to the violence which had been of- 


1 


2 HERODOTUS [ Book i 


fered to Medea, and they were asked with 
what face they could now require satisfaction, 
when they had formerly rejected all demands 
for either reparation or restitution addressed to 
them. 

4. Hitherto the injuries on either side had 
been mere acts of common violence; but in 
what followed the Persians consider that the 
Greeks were greatly to blame, since before any 
attack had been made on Europe, they led an 
army into Asia. Now as for the carrying off of 
women, it is the deed, they say, of a rogue: but 
to make a stir about such as are carried off, 
argues a man a fool. Men of sense care nothing 
for such women, since it is plain that without 
their own consent they would never be forced 
away. The Asiatics, when the Greeks ran off 
with their women, never troubled themselves 
about the matter; but the Greeks, for the sake 
of a single Lacedaemonian girl, collected a vast 
armament, invaded Asia, and destroyed the 
kingdom of Priam. Henceforth they ever 
looked upon the Greeks as their open enemies. 
For Asia, with all the various tribes of barbar¬ 
ians that inhabit it, is regarded by the Persians 
as their own; but Europe and the Greek race 
they look on as distinct and separate. 

5. Such is the account which the Persians 
give of these matters. They trace to the attack 
upon Troy their ancient enmity towards the 
Greeks. The Phoenicians, however, as regards 
lo, vary from the Persian statements. They 
deny that they used any violence to remove 
her into Egypt; she herself, they say, having 
formed an intimacy with the captain, while his 
vessel lay at Argos, and perceiving herself to be 
with child, of her own free will accompanied 
the Phoenicians on their leaving the shore, to 
escape the shame of detection and the re¬ 
proaches of her parents. Whether this latter ac¬ 
count be true, or whether the matter happened 
otherwise, I shall not discuss further. I shall 
proceed at once to point out the person who 
first within my own knowledge inflicted in¬ 
jury on the Greeks, after which I shall go for¬ 
ward with my history, describing equally the 
greater and the lesser cities. For the cities 
which were formerly great have most of them 
become insignificant; and such as are at pres¬ 
ent powerful, were weak in the olden time. I 
shall therefore discourse equally of both, con¬ 
vinced that human happiness never continues 
long in one stay. 

6. CrcEsus, son of Alyattes, by birth a Lyd¬ 
ian, was lord of all the nations to the west of 
the river Halys. This stream, which separates 


Syria^ from Paphlagonia, runs with a course 
from south to north, and finally falls into the 
Euxine. So far as our knowledge goes, he was 
the first of the barbarians who had dealings 
with the Greeks, forcing some of them to be¬ 
come his tributaries, and entering into alliance 
with others. He conquered the iEolians, lon- 
ians, and Dorians of Asia, and made a treaty 
with the Lacedaemonians. Up to that time all 
Greeks had been free. For the Cimmerian at¬ 
tack upon Ionia, which was earlier than Croe¬ 
sus, was not a conquest of the cities, but only 
an inroad for plundering. 

7. The sovereignty of Lydia, which had be¬ 
longed to the Heraclides, passed into the fam- ^ 
ily of Croesus, who were called the Mermnadae, 
in the manner which I will now relate. There 
was a certain king of Sardis, Candaules by ! 
name, whom the Greeks called Myrsilus. He 
was a descendant of Alcaeus, son of Hercules. 
The first king of this dynasty was Agron, son | 
of Ninus, grandson of Belus, and great-grand¬ 
son of Alcaeus; Candaules, son of Myrsus, was 1 , 
the last. The kings who reigned before Agron | i 
sprang from Lydus, son of Atys, from whom | j 
the people of the land, called previously Meon- 1 1 
ians, received the name of Lydians. The Hera¬ 
clides, descended from Hercules and the slave- | | 
girl of Jardanus, having been entrusted by these ' 
princes with the management of affairs, ob- I 
tained the kingdom by an oracle. Their rule 
endured for two and twenty generations of 
men, a space of five hundred and five years; 
during the whole of which period, from Agron 

to Candaules, the crown descended in the di¬ 
rect line from father to son. 

8. Now it happened that this Candaules was 
in love with his own wife; and not only so, but 
thought her the fairest woman in the whole 
world. This fancy had strange consequences. 
There was in his bodyguard a man whom he 
specially favoured, Gyges, the son of Dascylus. 

All affairs of greatest moment were entrusted 
by Candaules to this person, and to him he was 
wont to extol the surpassing beauty of his wife. 

So matters went on for a while. At length, one 
day, Candaules, who was fated to end ill, thus 
addressed his follower: “I see thou dost not 
credit what I tell thee of my lady's loveliness; 
but come now, since men's ears are less credu¬ 
lous than their eyes, contrive some means 
whereby thou mayst behold her naked." At 

^ By Syria Herodotus here means Cappadocia, 
the inhabitants of which he calls Syrians (i. 72, 
and vii. 72), or Cappadocian Syrians {ZvpLovs 
Kawwado Kas i. 72). 






4 - 13 ] THE HISTORY 3 


this the other loudly exclaimed, saying, “What 
most unwise speech is this, master, which thou 
hast uttered? Wouldst thou have me behold 
my mistress when she is naked? Bethink thee 
that a woman, with her clothes, puts off her 
bashfulness. Our fathers, in time past, distin¬ 
guished right and wrong plainly enough, and 
it is our wisdom to submit to be taught by 
them. There is an old saying, ‘Let each look on 
his own.’ I hold thy wife for the fairest of all 
womankind. Only, I beseech thee, ask me not 
to do wickedly.” 

9. Gyges thus endeavoured to decline the 
king’s proposal, trembling lest some dreadful 
evil should befall him through it. But the king 
replied to him, “Courage, friend; suspect me 
not of the design to prove thee by this dis¬ 
course; nor dread thy mistress, lest mischief be¬ 
fall thee at her hands. Be sure I will so manage 
that she shall not even know that thou hast 
looked upon her. I will place thee behind the 
open door of the chamber in which we sleep. 
When I enter to go to rest she will follow me. 
There stands a chair close to the entrance, on 
which she will lay her clothes one by one as she 
takes them off. Thou wilt be able thus at thy 
leisure to peruse her person. Then, when she is 
moving from the chair toward the bed, and her 
back is turned on thee, be it thy care that she 
see thee not as thou passest through the door¬ 
way.” 

10. Gyges, unable to escape, could but de¬ 
clare his readiness. Then Candaules, when 
bedtime came, led Gyges into his sleeping- 
chamber, and a moment after the queen fol¬ 
lowed. She entered, and laid her garments on 
the chair, and Gyges gazed on her. After a 
while she moved toward the bed, and her back 
being then turned, he glided stealthily from 
the apartment. As he was passing out, how¬ 
ever, she saw him, and instantly divining what 
had happened, she neither screamed as her 
shame impelled her, nor even appeared to have 
noticed aught, purposing to take vengeance 
upon the husband who had so affronted her. 
For among the Lydians, and indeed among 
the barbarians generally, it is reckoned a deep 
disgrace, even to a man, to be seen naked. 

11. No sound or sign of intelligence escaped 
her at the time. But in the morning, as soon as 
day broke, she hastened to choose from among 
her retinue such as she knew to be most faith¬ 
ful to her, and preparing them for what was 
to ensue, summoned Gyges into her presence. 
Now it had often happened before that the 
queen had desired to confer with him, and he 


was accustomed to come to her at her call. He 
therefore obeyed the summons, not suspecting 
that she knew aught of what had occurred. 
Then she addressed these words to him: “Take 
thy choice, Gyges, of two courses which are 
open to thee. Slay Candaules, and thereby be¬ 
come my lord, and obtain the Lydian throne, 
or die this moment in his room. So wilt thou 
not again, obeying all behests of thy master, be¬ 
hold what is not lawful for thee. It must needs 
be that either he perish by whose counsel this 
thing was done, or thou, who sawestme naked, 
and so didst break our usages.” At these words 
Gyges stood awhile in mute astonishment; re¬ 
covering after a time, he earnestly besought the 
queen that she would not compel him to so 
hard a choice. But finding he implored in vain, 
and that necessity was indeed laid on him to 
kill or to be killed, he made choice of life for 
himself, and replied by this inquiry: “If it must 
be so, and thou compellest me against my will 
to put my lord to death, come, let me hear how 
thou wilt have me set on him.” “Let him be at¬ 
tacked,” she answered, “on the spot where I 
was by him shown naked to you, and let the 
assault be made when he is asleep.” 

12. All was then prepared for the attack, and 
when night fell, Gyges, seeing that he had no 
retreat or escape, but must absolutely either slay 
Candaules, or himself be slain, followed his 
mistress into the sleeping-room. She placed a 
dagger in his hand, and hid him carefully behind 
the self-same door. Then Gyges, when the king 
was fallen asleep, entered privily into the cham¬ 
ber and struck him dead. Thus did the wife 
and kingdom of Candaules pass into the posses¬ 
sion of Gyges, of whom Archilochus the Parian, 
who lived about the same time, made mention 
in a poem written in iambic trimeter verse. 

13. Gyges was afterwards confirmed in the 
possession of the throne by an answer of the 
Delphic oracle. Enraged at the murder of their 
king, the people flew to arms, but after a while 
the partisans of Gyges came to terms with 
them, and it was agreed that if the Delphic 
oracle declared him king of the Lydians, he 
should reign; if otherwise, he should yield the 
throne to the Heraclides. As the oracle was 
given in his favour he became king. The Py¬ 
thoness, however, added that, in the fifth gen¬ 
eration from Gyges, vengeance should come 
for the Heraclides; a prophecy of which 
neither the Lydians nor their princes took any 
account till it was fulfilled. Such was the way 
in which the Mermnadae deposed the Heracli¬ 
des, and themselves obtained the sovereignty. 


HERODOTUS 


14. When Gyges was established on the 
throne, he sent no small presents to Delphi, as 
his many silver offerings at the Delphic shrine 
testify. Besides this silver he gave a vast num¬ 
ber of vessels of gold, among which the most 
worthy of mention are the goblets, six in num¬ 
ber, and weighing altogether thirty talents, 
which stand in the Corinthian treasury, dedi¬ 
cated by him. I call it the Corinthian treasury, 
though in strictness of speech it is the treasury 
not of the whole Corinthian people, but of 
Cypselus, son of Eetion. Excepting Midas, son 
of Gordias, king of Phrygia, Gyges was the 
first of the barbarians whom we know to have 
sent offerings to Delphi. Midas dedicated the 
royal throne whereon he was accustomed to sit 
and administer justice, an object well worth 
looking at. It lies in the same place as the gob¬ 
lets presented by Gyges. The Delphians call the 
whole of the silver and the gold which Gyges 
dedicated, after the name of the donor, Gygian. 

As soon as Gyges was king he made an in¬ 
road on Miletus and Smyrna, and took the city 
of Colophon. Afterwards, however, though he 
reigned eight and thirty years, he did not per¬ 
form a single noble exploit. I shall therefore 
make no further mention of him, but pass on 
to his son and successor in the kingdom, Ardys. 

15. Ardys took Priene and made war upon 
Miletus. In his reign the Cimmerians, driven 
from their homes by the nomads of Scythia, 
entered Asia and captured Sardis, all but the 
citadel. He reigned forty-nine years, and was 
succeeded by his son, Sadyattes, who reigned 
twelve years. At his death his son Alyattes 
mounted the throne. 

16. This prince waged war with the Medes 
under Cyaxares, the grandson of Dei'oces, drove 
the Cimmerians out of Asia, conquered 
Smyrna, the Colophonian colony, and invaded 
Clazomenae. From this last contest he did not 
come off as he could have wished, but met with 
a sore defeat; still, however, in the course of his 
reign, he performed other actions very worthy 
of note, of which I will now proceed to give an 
account. 

17. Inheriting from his father a war with 
the Milesians, he pressed the siege against the 
city by attacking it in the following manner. 
When the harvest was ripe on the ground he 
marched his army into Milesia to the sound of 
pipes and harps, and flutes masculine and fem¬ 
inine. The buildings that were scattered over 
the country he neither pulled down nor burnt, 
nor did he even tear away the doors, but left 
them standing as they were. He cut down, 


[ Book i 

however, and utterly destroyed all the trees and 
all the corn throughout the land, and then re¬ 
turned to his own dominions. It was idle for 
his army to sit down before the place, as the 
Milesians were masters of the sea. The reason 
that he did not demolish their buildings was 
that the inhabitants might be tempted to use 
them as homesteads from which to go forth to 
sow and till their lands; and so each time that 
he invaded the country he might find some¬ 
thing to plunder. 

18. In this way he carried on the war with 
the Milesians for eleven years, in the course of 
which he inflicted on them two terrible blows; 
one in their own country in the district of 
Limeneium,the other in the plain of the Maean- 
der. During six of these eleven years, Sadyattes, 
the son of Ardys, who first lighted the flames 
of this war, was king of Lydia, and made the 
incursions. Only the five following years be¬ 
long to the reign of Alyattes, son of Sadyattes, 
who (as I said before) inheriting the war from 
his father, applied himself to it unremittingly. 
The Milesians throughout the contest received 
no help at all from any of the lonians, except¬ 
ing those of Chios, who lent them troops in re¬ 
quital of a like service rendered them in for¬ 
mer times, the Milesians having fought on the 
side of the Chians during the whole of the war 
between them and the people of Erythrae. 

19. It was in the twelfth year of the war that 
the following mischance occurred from the fir¬ 
ing of the harvest-fields. Scarcely had the corn 
been set alight by the soldiers when a violent 
wind carried the flames against the temple of 
Minerva Assesia, which caught fire and was 
burnt to the ground. At the time no one made 
any account of the circumstance; but after¬ 
wards, on the return of the army to Sardis, 
Alyattes fell sick. His illness continued, where¬ 
upon, either advised thereto by some friend, or 
perchance himself conceiving the idea, he sent 
messengers to Delphi to inquire of the god con¬ 
cerning his malady. On their arrival the Py¬ 
thoness declared that no answer should be 
given them until they had rebuilt the temple of 
Minerva, burnt by the Lydians at Assesus in 
Milesia. 

20. Thus much I know from information 
given me by the Delphians; the remainder of 
the story the Milesians add. 

The answer made by the oracle came to the 
ears of Periander, son of Cypselus, who was a 
very close friend to Thrasybulus, tyrant of 
Miletus at that period. He instantly despatched 
a messenger to report the oracle to him, in or- 





14-25] THE HISTORY 5 


der that Thrasybulus, forewarned of its tenor, 
might the better adapt his measures to the pos¬ 
ture of affairs. 

21. Alyattes, the moment that the words of 
the oracle were reported to him, sent a herald to 
Miletus in hopes of concluding a truce with 
Thrasybulus and the Milesians for such a time 
as was needed to rebuild the temple. The herald 
went upon his way; but meantime Thrasybu¬ 
lus had been apprised of everything; and con¬ 
jecturing what Alyattes would do, he contrived 
this artifice. He had all the corn that was in the 
city, whether belonging to himself or to private 
persons, brought into the market-place, and 
issued an order that the Milesians should hold 
themselves in readiness, and, when he gave the 
signal, should, one and all, fall to drinking and 
revelry. 

22. The purpose for which he gave these or¬ 
ders was the following. He hoped that the Sar¬ 
dian herald, seeing so great store of corn upon 
the ground, and all the city given up to festiv¬ 
ity, would inform Alyattes of it, which fell out 
as he anticipated. The herald observed the 
whole, and when he had delivered his message, 
went back to Sardis. This circumstance alone, 
as I gather, brought about the peace which en¬ 
sued. Alyattes, who had hoped that there was 
now a great scarcity of corn in Miletus, and 
that the people were worn down to the last 
pitch of suffering, when he heard from the 
herald on his return from Miletus tidings so 
contrary to those he had expected, made a 
treaty with the enemy by which the two na¬ 
tions became close friends and allies. He then 
built at Assesus two temples to Minerva in¬ 
stead of one, and shortly after recovered from 
his malady. Such were the chief circumstances 
of the war which Alyattes waged with Thra¬ 
sybulus and the Milesians. 

23. This Periander, who apprised Thrasybu¬ 
lus of the oracle, was son of Cypselus, and ty¬ 
rant of Corinth. In his time a very wonderful 
thing is said to have happened. The Corinthi¬ 
ans and the Lesbians agree in their account of 
the matter. They relate that Arion of Methym- 
na, who as a player on the harp, was second to 
no man living at that time, and who was, so 
far as we know, the first to invent the dithy- 
rambic measure, to give it its name, and to re¬ 
cite in it at Corinth, was carried to Taenarum 
on the back of a dolphin. 

24. He had lived for many years at the court 
of Periander, when a longing came upon him 
to sail across to Italy and Sicily. Having made 
rich profits in those parts, he wanted to recross 


the seas to Corinth. He therefore hired a vessel, 
the crew of which were Corinthians, thinking 
that there was no people in whom he could 
more safely confide; and, going on board, he 
set sail from Tarentum. The sailors, however, 
when they reached the open sea, formed a plot 
to throw him overboard and seize upon his 
riches. Discovering their design, he fell on his 
knees, beseeching them to spare his life, and 
making them welcome to his money. But they 
refused; and required him either to kill him¬ 
self outright, if he wished for a grave on the 
dry land, or without loss of time to leap over¬ 
board into the sea. In this strait Arion begged 
them, since such was their pleasure, to allow 
him to mount upon the quarter-deck, dressed 
in his full costume, and there to play and sing, 
and promising that, as soon as his song was 
ended, he would destroy himself. Delighted at 
the prospect of hearing the very best harper in 
the world, they consented, and withdrew from 
the stern to the middle of the vessel: while 
Arion dressed himself in the full costume of his 
calling, took his harp, and standing on the 
quarter-deck, chanted the Orthian. His strain 
ended, he flung himself, fully attired as he was, 
headlong into the sea. The Corinthians then 
sailed on to Corinth. As for Arion, a dolphin, 
they say, took him upon his back and carried 
him to Taenarum, where he went ashore, and 
thence proceeded to Corinth in his musician’s 
dress, and told all that had happened to him. 
Periander, however, disbelieved the story, and 
put Arion in ward, to prevent his leaving Cor¬ 
inth, while he watched anxiously for the re¬ 
turn of the mariners. On their arrival he sum¬ 
moned them before him and asked them if 
they could give him any tiding of Arion. They 
returned for answer that he was alive and in 
good health in Italy, and that they had left him 
at Tarentum, where he was doing well. There¬ 
upon Arion appeared before them, just as he 
was when he jumped from the vessel: the men, 
astonished and detected in falsehood, could no 
longer deny their guilt. Such is the account 
which the Corinthians and Lesbians give; and 
there is to this day at Taenarum, an offering of 
Arion’s at the shrine, which is a small figure in 
bronze, representing a man seated upon a 
dolphin. 

25. Having brought the war with the Mile¬ 
sians to a close, and reigned over the land of 
Lydia for fifty-seven years, Alyattes died. He 
was the second prince of his house who made 
offerings at Delphi. His gifts, which he sent on 
recovering from his sickness, were a great 


6 

bowl of pure silver, with a salver in steel curi¬ 
ously inlaid, a work among all the offerings at 
Delphi the best worth looking at. Glaucus, the 
Chian, made it, the man who first invented the 
art of inlaying steel. 

26. On the death of Alyattes, CrcEsus, his 
son, who was thirty-five years old, succeeded to 
the throne. Of the Greek cities, Ephesus was the 
first that he attacked. The Ephesians, when he 
laid siege to the place, made an offering of 
their city to Diana, by stretching a rope from 
the town wall to the temple of the goddess, 
which was distant from the ancient city, then 
besieged by Croesus, a space of seven furlongs. 
They were, as I said, the first Greeks whom he 
attacked. Afterwards, on some pretext or other, 
he made war in turn upon every Ionian and 
.^olian state, bringing forward, where he 
could, a substantial ground of complaint; where 
such failed him, advancing some poor excuse. 

27. In this way he made himself master of 
all the Greek cities in Asia, and forced them to 
become his tributaries; after which he began to 
think of building ships, and attacking the 
islanders. Everything had been got ready for 
this purpose, when Bias of Priene (or, as some 
say, Pittacus the Mytilenean) put a stop to the 
project. The king had made inquiry of this 
person, who was lately arrived at Sardis, if 
there were any news from Greece; to which he 
answered, “Yes, sire, the islanders are gather¬ 
ing ten thousand horse, designing an expedi¬ 
tion against thee and against thy capital.” Croe¬ 
sus, thinking he spake seriously, broke out, 
“Ah, might the gods put such a thought into 
their minds as to attack the sons of the Lydians 
with cavalry!” “It seems, oh! king,” rejoined 
the other, “that thou desirest earnestly to catch 
the islanders on horseback upon the mainland, 
—thou knowest well what would come of it. 
But what thinkest thou the islanders desire bet¬ 
ter, now that they hear thou art about to build 
ships and sail against them, than to catch the 
Lydians at sea, and there revenge on them the 
wrongs of their brothers upon the mainland, 
whom thou boldest in slavery.?” CrcEsus was 
charmed with the turn of the speech; and 
thinking there was reason in what was said, 
gave up his ship-building and concluded a 
league of amity with the lonians of the isles. 

28. Croesus afterwards, in the course of 
many years, brought under his sway almost all 
the nations to the west of the Halys. The Lyci- 
ans and Cilicians alone continued free; all the 
other tribes he reduced and held in subjection. 
They were the following: the Lydians, Phryg- 


[ Book i 

ians, Mysians, Mariandynians, Chalybians, 
Paphlagonians, Thynian and Bithynian Thra¬ 
cians, Carians, lonians, Dorians, iEolians and 
Pamphylians.^ 

29. When all these conquests had been 
added to the Lydian empire, and the prosperity 
of Sardis was now at its height, there came 
thither, one after another, all the sages of 
Greece living at the time, and among them 
Solon, the Athenian. He was on his travels, 
having left Athens to be absent ten years, un¬ 
der the pretence of wishing to see the world, 
but really to avoid being forced to repeal any 
of the laws which, at the request of the Athen¬ 
ians, he had made for them. Without his sane- i 
tion the Athenians could not repeal them, as 
they had bound themselves under a heavy 
curse to be governed for ten years by the laws 
which should be Imposed on them by Solon. 

30. On this account, as well as to see the 
world, Solon set out upon his travels, in the 
course of which he went to Egypt to the court 
of Amasis, and also came on a visit to Croesus 
at Sardis. Croesus received him as his guest, 
and lodged him in the royal palace. On the 
third or fourth day after, he bade his servants 
conduct Solon over his treasuries, and show 
him all their greatness and magnificence. 
When he had seen them all, and, so far as time 
allowed, inspected them, Croesus addressed 
this question to him. “Stranger of Athens, we 
have heard much of thy wisdom and of thy 
travels through many lands, from love of 
knowledge and a wish to see the world. I am 
curious therefore to inquire of thee, whom, of 
all the men that thou hast seen, thou deemest 
the most happy.?” This he asked because he ' 
thought himself the happiest of mortals: but 
Solon answered him without flattery, accord¬ 
ing to his true sentiments, “Tellus of Athens, 
sire.” Full of astonishment at what he heard, 
Croesus demanded sharply, “And wherefore 
dost thou deem Tellus happiest?” To which 
the other replied, “First, because his country 
was flourishing in his days, and he himself had 
sons both beautiful and good, and he lived to 
see children born to each of them, and these 
children all grew up; and further because, after 

a life spent in what our people look upon as 
comfort, his end was surpassingly glorious. In 
a battle between the Athenians and their 

^ It is not quite correct to speak of the Cilici¬ 
ans as dwelling within (i.e., west of) the Halys, 
for the Halys in its upper course ran through I 
Cilicia (Std KiXUcovy I. 72), and that country lay 
chiefly south of the river. 


HERODOTUS 








26-32 ] THE HISTORY 7 


neighbours near Eleusis, he came to the assist¬ 
ance of his countrymen, routed the foe, and 
died upon the field most gallantly. The Athe¬ 
nians gave him a public funeral on the spot 
where he fell, and paid him the highest hon¬ 
ours.” 

31. Thus did Solon admonish Croesus by the 
example of Tellus, enumerating the manifold 
particulars of his happiness. When he had 
ended, Croesus inquired a second time, who 
after Tellus seemed to him the happiest, ex¬ 
pecting that at any rate, he would be given the 
second place. “Cleobis and Bito,” Solon an¬ 
swered; “they were of Argive race; their for¬ 
tune was enough for their wants, and they 
were besides endowed with so much bodily 
strength that they had both gained prizes at 
the Games. Also this tale is told of them:— 
There was a great festival in honour of the 
goddess Juno at Argos, to which their mother 
must needs be taken in a car. Now the oxen 
did not come home from the field in time: so 
the youths, fearful of being too late, put the 
yoke on their own necks, and themselves drew 
the car in which their mother rode. Five and 
forty furlongs did they draw her, and stopped 
before the temple. This deed of theirs was wit¬ 
nessed by the whole assembly of worshippers, 
and then their life closed in the best possible 
way. Herein, too, God showed forth most evi¬ 
dently, how much better a thing for man death 
is than life. For the Argive men, who stood 
around the car, extolled the vast strength of the 
youths; and the Argive women extolled the 
mother who was blessed with such a pair of 
sons; and the mother herself, overjoyed at the 
deed and at the praises it had won, standing 
straight before the image, besought the god¬ 
dess to bestow on Cleobis and Bito, the sons 
who had so mightily honoured her, the highest 
blessing to which mortals can attain. Her 
prayer ended, they offered sacrifice and par¬ 
took of the holy banquet, after which the two 
youths fell asleep in the temple. They never 
woke more, but so passed from the earth. The 
Argives, looking on them as among the best of 
men, caused statues of them to be made, which 
they gave to the shrine at Delphi.” 

32. When Solon had thus assigned these 
youths the second place, Croesus broke in an¬ 
grily, “What, stranger of Athens, is my happi¬ 
ness, then, so utterly set at nought by thee, that 
thou dost not even put me on a level with 
private men.^^” 

“Oh! Croesus,” replied the other, “thou ask- 
edst a question concerning the condition of 


man, of one who knows that the power above 
us is full of jealousy, and fond of troubling our 
lot. A long life gives one to witness much, and 
experience much oneself, that one would not 
choose. Seventy years I regard as the limit of 
the life of man. In these seventy years are con¬ 
tained, without reckoning intercalary months, 
twenty-five thousand and two hundred days. 
Add an intercalary month to every other year, 
that the seasons may come round at the right 
time, and there will be, besides the seventy 
years, thirty-five such months, making an addi¬ 
tion of one thousand and fifty days. The whole 
number of the days contained in the seventy 
years will thus be twenty-six thousand two 
hundred and fifty, whereof not one but will 
produce events unlike the rest. Hence man is 
wholly accident. For thyself, oh! Croesus, I see 
that thou art wonderfully rich, and art the lord 
of many nations; but with respect to that 
whereon thou questionest me, I have no an¬ 
swer to give, until I hear that thou hast closed 
thy life happily. For assuredly he who possesses 
great store of riches is no nearer happiness 
than he who has what suffices for his daily 
needs, unless it so hap that luck attend upon 
him, and so he continue in the enjoyment of 
all his good things to the end of life. For many 
of the wealthiest men have been unfavoured of 
fortune, and many whose means were moder¬ 
ate have had excellent luck. Men of the former 
class excel those of the latter but in two re¬ 
spects; these last excel the former in many. The 
wealthy man is better able to content his de¬ 
sires, and to bear up against a sudden buffet of 
calamity. The other has less ability to with¬ 
stand these evils (from which, however, his 
good luck keeps him clear), but he enjoys all 
these following blessings: he is whole of limb, 
a stranger to disease, free from misfortune, 
happy in his children, and comely to look 
upon. If, in addition to all this, he end his life 
well, he is of a truth the man of whom thou art 
in search, the man who may rightly be termed 
happy. Call him, however, until he die, not 
happy but fortunate. Scarcely, indeed, can any 
man unite all these advantages: as there is no 
country which contains within it all that it 
needs, but each, while it possesses some things, 
lacks others, and the best country is that which 
contains the most; so no single human being is 
complete in every respect—something is al¬ 
ways lacking. He who unites the greatest num¬ 
ber of advantages, and retaining them to the 
day of his death, then dies peaceably, that man 
alone, sire, is, in my judgment, entitled to bear 


8 HERODOTUS [ Book i 


the name of ‘happy.’ But in every matter it be¬ 
hoves us to mark well the end: for oftentimes 
God gives men a gleam of happiness, and then 
plunges them into ruin.” 

33. Such was the speech which Solon ad¬ 
dressed to Crcesus, a speech which brought 
him neither largess nor honour. The king saw 
him depart with much indifference, since he 
thought that a man must be an arrant fool who 
made no account of present good, but bade 
men always wait and mark the end. 

34. After Solon had gone away a dreadful 
vengeance, sent of God, came upon Croesus, to 
punish him, it is likely, for deeming himself 
the happiest of men. First he had a dream in 
the night, which foreshowed him truly the 
evils that were about to befall him in the per¬ 
son of his son. For Croesus had two sons, one 
blasted by a natural defect, being deaf and 
dumb; the other, distinguished far above all 
his co-mates in every pursuit. The name of the 
last was Atys. It was this son concerning whom 
he dreamt a dream that he would die by the 
blow of an iron weapon. When he woke, he 
considered earnestly with himself, and, greatly 
alarmed at the dream, instantly made his son 
take a wife, and whereas in former years the 
youth had been wont to command the Lydian 
forces in the field, he now would not suffer 
him to accompany them. All the spears and 
javelins, and weapons used in the wars, he re¬ 
moved out of the male apartments, and laid 
them in heaps in the chambers of the women, 
fearing lest perhaps one of the weapons that 
hung against the wall might fall and strike 
him. 

35. Now it chanced that while he was mak¬ 
ing arrangements for the wedding, there came 
to Sardis a man under a misfortune, who had 
upon him the stain of blood. He was by race a 
Phrygian, and belonged to the family of the 
king. Presenting himself at the palace of Croe¬ 
sus, he prayed to be admitted to purification 
according to the customs of the country. Now 
the Lydian method of purifying is very nearly 
the same as the Greek. Croesus granted the re¬ 
quest, and went through all the customary 
rites, after which he asked the suppliant of his 
birth and country, addressing him as follows:— 
“Who art thou, stranger, and from what part 
of Phrygia fleddest thou to take refuge at my 
hearth? And whom, moreover, what man or 
what woman, hast thou slain?” “Oh! king,” 
replied the Phrygian, “I am the son of Gordias, 
son of Midas. I am named Adrastus. The man 
I unintentionally slew was my own brother. 


For this my father drove me from the land, 
and I lost all. Then fled I here to thee.” “Thou 
art the offspring,” Crcesus rejoined, “of a house 
friendly to mine, and thou art come to friends. 
Thou shalt want for nothing so long as thou 
abidest in my dominions. Bear thy misfortune 
as easily as thou mayest, so will it go best with 
thee.” Thenceforth Adrastus lived in the pal¬ 
ace of the king. 

36. It chanced that at this very same time 
there was in the Mysian Olympus a huge mon¬ 
ster of a boar, which went forth often from this 
mountain country, and wasted the corn-fields 
of the Mysians. Many a time had the Mysians 
collected to hunt the beast, but instead of doing 
him any hurt, they came off always with some 
loss to themselves. At length they sent ambas¬ 
sadors to CrcEsus, who delivered their message 
to him in these words: “Oh! king, a mighty 
monster of a boar has appeared in our parts, 
and destroys the labour of our hands. We do 
our best to take him, but in vain. Now there¬ 
fore we beseech thee to let thy son accompany 
us back, with some chosen youths and hounds, 
that we may rid our country of the animal.” 
Such was the tenor of their prayer. 

But Crcesus bethought him of his dream, and 
answered, “Say no more of my son going with 
you; that may not be in any wise. He is but just 
joined in wedlock, and is busy enough with 
that. I will grant you a picked band of Lydi¬ 
ans, and all my huntsmen and hounds; and I 
will charge those whom I send to use all zeal 
in aiding you to rid your country of the brute.” 

37. With this reply the Mysians were con¬ 
tent; but the king’s son, hearing what the 
prayer of the Mysians was, came suddenly in, 
and on the refusal of Croesus to let him go with 
them, thus addressed his father: “Formerly, 
my father, it was deemed the noblest and most 
suitable thing for me to frequent the wars and 
hunting-parties, and win myself glory in them; 
but now thou keepest me away from both, al¬ 
though thou hast never beheld in me either 
cowardice or lack of spirit. What face mean¬ 
while must I wear as I walk to the forum or 
return from it? What must the citizens, what 
must my young bride think of me? What sort 
of man will she suppose her husband to be? 
Either, therefore, let me go to the chase of this 
boar, or give me a reason why it is best for me 
to do according to thy wishes.” 

38. Then Crcesus answered, “My son, it is I 
not because I have seen in thee either coward- 1 
ice or aught else which has displeased me ' 
that I keep thee back; but because a vision 




9 


33-45 ] the history 


which came before me in a dream as I slept, 
warned me that thou wert doomed to die 
young, pierced by an iron weapon. It was this 
which first led me to hasten on thy wedding, 
and now it hinders me from sending thee upon 
this enterprise. Fain would I keep watch over 
thee, if by any means I may cheat fate of thee 
during my own lifetime. For thou art the one 
and only son that I possess; the other, whose 
hearing is destroyed, I regard as if he were 
not. 

39. “Ah! father,” returned the youth, “I 
blame thee not for keeping watch over me after 
a dream so terrible; but if thou mistakest, if 
thou dost not apprehend the dream aright, ’tis 
no blame for me to show thee wherein thou 
errest. Now the dream, thou saidst thyself, 
foretold that I should die stricken by an iron 
weapon. But what hands has a boar to strike 
with.^ What iron weapon does he wield Yet 
this is what thou fearest for me. Had the 
dream said that I should die pierced by a tusk, 
then thou hadst done well to keep me away; 
but it said a weapon. Now here we do not com¬ 
bat men, but a wild animal. I pray thee, there¬ 
fore, let me go with them.” 

40. “There thou hast me, my son,” said 
CrcEsus, “thy interpretation is better than 
mine. I yield to it, and change my mind, and 
consent to let thee go.” 

41. Then the king sent for Adrastus, the 
Phrygian, and said to him, “Adrastus, when 
thou wert smitten with the rod of affliction— 
no reproach, my friend—I purified thee, and 
have taken thee to live with me in my palace, 
and have been at every charge. Now, therefore, 
it behoves thee to requite the good offices 
which thou hast received at my hands by con¬ 
senting to go with my son on this hunting 
party, and to watch over him, if perchance you 
should be attacked upon the road by some band 
of daring robbers. Even apart from this, it 
were right for thee to go where thou mayest 
make thyself famous by noble deeds. They are 
the heritage of thy family, and thou too art so 
stalwart and strong.” 

42. Adrastus answered, “Except for thy re¬ 
quest, Oh! king, I would rather have kept 
away from this hunt; for methinks it ill be¬ 
seems a man under a misfortune such as mine 
to consort with his happier compeers; and be¬ 
sides, I have no heart to it. On many grounds I 
had stayed behind; but, as thou urgest it, and I 
am bound to pleasure thee (for truly it does 
behove me to requite thy good offices), I am 
content to do as thou wishest. For thy son. 


whom thou givest into my charge, be sure 
thou shalt receive him back safe and sound, 
so far as depends upon a guardian’s care¬ 
fulness.” 

43. Thus assured, Croesus let them depart, 
accompanied by a band of picked youths, and 
well provided with dogs of chase. When they 
reached Olympus, they scattered in quest of 
the animal; he was soon found, and the hunters, 
drawing round him in a circle, hurled their 
weapons at him. Then the stranger, the man 
who had been purified of blood, whose name 
was Adrastus, he also hurled his spear at the 
boar, but missed his aim, and struck Atys. 
Thus was the son of Croesus slain by the point 
of an iron weapon, and the warning of the 
vision was fulfilled. Then one ran to Sardis to 
bear the tidings to the king, and he came and 
informed him of the combat and of the fate 
that had befallen his son. 

44. If it was a heavy blow to the father to 
learn that his child was dead, it yet more 
strongly affected him to think that the very 
man whom he himself once purified had done 
the deed. In the violence of his grief he called 
aloud on Jupiter Catharsius to be a witness of 
what he had suffered at the stranger’s hands. 
Afterwards he invoked the same god as Jupiter 
Ephistius and Hetaereus—using the one term 
because he had unwittingly harboured in his 
house the man who had now slain his son; and 
the other, because the stranger, who had been 
sent as his child’s guardian, had turned out his 
most cruel enemy. 

45. Presently the Lydians arrived, bearing 
the body of the youth, and behind them fol¬ 
lowed the homicide. He took his stand in front 
of the corse, and, stretching forth his hands to 
Croesus, delivered himself into his power with 
earnest entreaties that he would sacrifice him 
upon the body of his son—“his former misfor¬ 
tune was burthen enough; now that he had 
added to it a second, and had brought ruin on 
the man who purified him, he could not bear 
to live.” Then Croesus, when he heard these 
words, was moved with pity towards Adrastus, 
notwithstanding the bitterness of his own ca¬ 
lamity; and so he answered, “Enough, my 
friend; I have all the revenge that I require, 
since thou givest sentence of death against thy¬ 
self. But in sooth it is not thou who hast in¬ 
jured me, except so far as thou hast unwit¬ 
tingly dealt the blow. Some god is the author 
of my misfortune, and I was forewarned of it 
a long time ago.” Crcesus after this buried the 
body of his son, with such honours as befitted 


10 HERODOTUS [ Book i 


the occasion. Adrastus, son of Gordias, son of 
Midas, the destroyer of his brother in time 
past, the destroyer now of his purifier, regard¬ 
ing himself as the most unfortunate wretch 
whom he had ever known, so soon as all was 
quiet about the place, slew himself upon the 
tomb. Croesus, bereft of his son, gave himself 
up to mourning for two full years. 

46. At the end of this time the grief of Croe¬ 
sus was interrupted by intelligence from 
abroad. He learnt that Cyrus, the son of Cam- 
byses, had destroyed the empire of Astyages, 
the son of Cyaxares; and that the Persians were 
becoming daily more powerful. This led him 
to consider with himself whether it were possi¬ 
ble to check the growing power of that people 
before it came to a head. With this design he 
resolved to make instant trial of the several ora¬ 
cles in Greece, and of the one in Libya. So he 
sent his messengers in different directions, 
some to Delphi, some to Ahx in Phocis, and 
some to Dodona; others to the oracle of Am- 
phiaraus; others to that of Trophonius; others, 
again, to Branchidae in Milesia. These were the 
Greek oracles which he consulted. To Libya he 
sent another embassy, to consult the oracle of 
Ammon. These messengers were sent to test 
the knowledge of the oracles, that, if they were 
found really to return true answers, he might 
send a second time, and inquire if he ought to 
attack the Persians. 

47. The messengers who were despatched to 
make trial of the oracles were given the follow¬ 
ing instructions: they were to keep count of 
the days from the time of their leaving Sardis, 
and, reckoning from that date, on the hun¬ 
dredth day they were to consult the oracles, 
and to inquire of them what Croesus the son of 
Alyattes, king of Lydia, was doing at that mo¬ 
ment. The answers given them were to be 
taken down in writing, and brought back to 
him. None of the replies remain on record ex¬ 
cept that of the oracle at Delphi. There, the 
moment that the Lydians entered the sanctu¬ 
ary, and before they put their questions, the 
Pythoness thus answered them in hexameter 
verse:— 

/ can count the sands, and 1 can measure the 
ocean; 

1 have ears for the silent, and \now what the 
dumb man meaneth; 

Lo! on my sense there stri\eth the smell of a 
shell-covered tortoise. 

Boiling now on a fire, with the flesh of a lamb, 
in a cauldron — 

Brass is the vessel below, and brass the cover 
above iu 


48. These words the Lydians wrote down at 
the mouth of the Pythoness as she prophesied, 
and then set off on their return to Sardis. 
When all the messengers had come back with 
the answers which they had received, Crcesus 
undid the rolls, and read what was written in 
each. Only one approved itself to him, that of 
the Delphic oracle. This he had no sooner 
heard than he instantly made an act of adora¬ 
tion, and accepted it as true, declaring that the 
Delphic was the only really oracular shrine, the 
only one that had discovered in what way he 
was in fact employed. For on the departure of 
his messengers he had set himself to think what 
was most impossible for any one to conceive of 
his doing, and then, waiting till the day agreed 
on came, he acted as he had determined. He 
took a tortoise and a lamb, and cutting them 
in pieces with his own hands, boiled them both 
together in a brazen cauldron, covered over 
with a lid which was also of brass. 

49. Such then was the answer returned to 
Croesus from Delphi. What the answer was 
which the Lydians who went to the shrine of 
Amphiaraiis and performed the customary 1 
rites obtained of the oracle there, I have it not \ 
in my power to mention, for there is no record I 
of it. All that is known is that Croesus be¬ 
lieved himself to have found there also an ora¬ 
cle which spoke the truth. 

50. After this Croesus, having resolved to , 
propitiate the Delphic god with a magnificent | 
sacrifice, offered up three thousand of every I' 
kind of sacrificial beast, and besides made a [ 
huge pile, and placed upon it couches coated ! 
with silver and with gold, and golden goblets, ; 
and robes and vests of purple; all which he ! 
burnt in the hope of thereby making himself 
more secure of the favour of the god. Further 
he issued his orders to all the people of the land 

to offer a sacrifice according to their means. 
When the sacrifice was ended, the king melted 
down a vast quantity of gold, and ran it into 
ingots, making them six palms long, three | 
palms broad, and one palm in thickness. The ; 
number of ingots was a hundred and seven- I 
teen, four being of refined gold, in weight two ! 
talents and a half; the others of pale gold, and ! 
in weight two talents. He also caused a statue i 
of a lion to be made in refined gold, the weight I 
of which was ten talents. At the time when the 1 
temple of Delphi was burnt to the ground, this | 
lion fell from the ingots on which it was j 
placed; it now stands in the Corinthian treas¬ 
ury, and weighs only six talents and a half, | 
having lost three talents and a half by the fire. | 





46-56 ] 

51. On the completion of these works Crce- 
sus sent them away to Delphi, and with them 
two bowls of an enormous size, one of gold, the 
other of silver, which used to stand, the latter 
upon the right, the former upon the left, as one 
entered the temple. They too were moved at 
the time of the fire; and now the golden one is 
in the Clazomenian treasury, and weighs eight 
talents and forty-two minae; the silver one 
stands in the corner of the ante-chapel, and 
holds six hundred amphorae. This is known 
because the Delphians fill it at the time of the 
Theophania. It is said by the Delphians to be a 
work of Theodore the Samian, and I think that 
they say true, for assuredly it is the work of no 
common artist. Crcesus sent also four silver 
casks, which are in the Corinthian treasury, 
and two lustral vases, a golden and a silver one. 
On the former is inscribed the name of the 
Lacedaemonians, and they claim it as a gift of 
theirs, but wrongly, since it was really given by 
Croesus. The inscription upon it was cut by a 
Delphian, who wished to pleasure the Lace¬ 
daemonians. His name is known to me, but I 
forbear to mention it. The boy, through whose 
hand the water runs, is (I confess) a Lacedae¬ 
monian gift, but they did not give either of the 
lustral vases. Besides these various offerings, 
Crcesus sent to Delphi many others of less ac¬ 
count, among the rest a number of round silver 
basins. Also he dedicated a female figure in 
gold, three cubits high, which is said by the 
Delphians to be the statue of his baking- 
woman; and further, he presented the necklace 
and the girdles of his wife. 

52. These were the oflerings sent by Crcesus 
to Delphi. To the shrine of Amphiaraus, with 
whose valour and misfortune he was ac¬ 
quainted, he sent a shield entirely of gold, and 
a spear, also of solid gold, both head and shaft. 
They were still existing in my day at Thebes, 
laid up in the temple of Ismenian Apollo. 

53. The messengers who had the charge of 
conveying these treasures to the shrines, re¬ 
ceived instructions to ask the oracles whether 
Crcesus should go to war with the Persians, 
and if so, whether he should strengthen him¬ 
self by the forces of an ally. Accordingly, when 
they had reached their destinations and pre¬ 
sented the gifts, they proceeded to consult the 
oracles in the following terms:—“Crcesus, 
king of Lydia and other countries, believing 
that these are the only real oracles in all the 
world, has sent you such presents as your dis¬ 
coveries deserved, and now inquires of you 
whether he shall go to war with the Persians, 


11 

and if so, whether he shall strengthen himself 
by the forces of a confederate.” Both the ora¬ 
cles agreed in the tenor of their reply, which 
was in each case a prophecy that if Crcesus at¬ 
tacked the Persians, he would destroy a mighty 
empire, and a recommendation to him to look 
and see who were the most powerful of the 
Greeks, and to make alliance with them. 

54. At the receipt of these oracular replies 
Crcesus was overjoyed, and feeling sure now 
that he would destroy the empire of the Per¬ 
sians, he sent once more to Pytho, and present¬ 
ed to the Delphians, the number of whom he 
had ascertained, two gold staters apiece. In re¬ 
turn for this the Delphians granted to Crcesus 
and the Lydians the privilege of precedency in 
consulting the oracle, exemption from all 
charges, the most honourable seat at the festi¬ 
vals, and the perpetual right of becoming at 
pleasure citizens of their town. 

55. After sending these presents to the Del¬ 
phians, Crcesus a third time consulted the ora¬ 
cle, for having once proved its truthfulness, he 
wished to make constant use of it. The ques¬ 
tion whereto he now desired an answer was— 
“Whether his kingdom would be of long dura¬ 
tion.?” The following was the repiy of the 
Pythoness:— 

Wait till the time shall come when a mule is 
monarch of Media; 

Then, thou delicate Lydian, away to the pebbles 
of Hermus; 

Haste, oh! haste thee away, nor blush to behave 
li\e a coward. 

56. Of all the answers that had reached him, 
this pleased him far the best, for it seemed in¬ 
credible that a mule should ever come to be 
king of the Medes, and so he concluded that 
the sovereignty would never depart from him¬ 
self or his seed after him. Afterwards he turned 
his thoughts to the alliance which he had been 
recommended to contract, and sought to ascer¬ 
tain by inquiry which was the most powerful 
of the Grecian states. His inquiries pointed out 
to him two states as pre-eminent above the rest. 
These were the Lacedaemonians and the Athe¬ 
nians, the former of Doric, the latter of Ionic 
blood. And indeed these two nations had held 
from very early times the most distinguished 
place in Greece, the one being a Pelasgic, the 
other a Hellenic people, and the one having 
never quitted its original seats, while the other 
had been excessively migratory; for during the 
reign of Deucalion, Phthiotis was the country 
in which the Hellenes dwelt, but under Dorus, 


THE HISTORY 


12 HERODOTUS [ Book i 


the son of Hellen, they moved to the tract at 
the base of Ossa and Olympus, which is called 
Histia'otis; forced to retire from that region by 
the Cadmeians,^ they settled, under the name of 
Macedni, in the chain of Pindus. Hence they 
once more removed and came to Dryopis; and 
from Dryopis having entered the Peloponnese 
in this way, they became known as Dorians. 

57. What the language of the Pelasgi was I 
cannot say with any certainty. If, however, we 
may form a conjecture from the tongue spoken 
by the Pelasgi of the present day—those, for 
instance, who live at Creston above the Tyrr¬ 
henians, who formerly dwelt in the district 
named Thessaliotis, and were neighbours of 
the people now called the Dorians—or those 
again who founded Placia and Scylace upon 
the Hellespont, who had previously dwelt for 
some time with the Athenians—or those, in 
short, of any other of the cities which have 
dropped the name but are in fact Pelasgian; if, 
I say, we are to form a conjecture from any of 
these, we must pronounce that the Pelasgi 
spoke a barbarous language. If this were really 
so, and the entire Pelasgic race spoke the same 
tongue, the Athenians, who were certainly Pe¬ 
lasgi, must have changed their language at the 
same time that they passed into the Hellenic 
body; for it is a certain fact that the people of 
Creston speak a language unlike any of their 
neighbours, and the same is true of the Placi- 
anians, while the language spoken by these two 
people is the same; which shows that they both 
retain the idiom which they brought with 
them into the countries where they are now 
settled. 

58. The Hellenic race has never, since its 
first origin, changed its speech. This at least 
seems evident to me. It was a branch of the 
Pelasgic, which separated from the main body, 
and at first was scanty in numbers and of little 
power; but it gradually spread and increased to 
a multitude of nations, chiefly by the voluntary 
entrance into its ranks of numerous tribes of 
barbarians. The Pelasgi, on the other hand, 
were, as I think, a barbarian race which never 
greatly multiplied. 

59. On inquiring into the condition of these 
two nations, Croesus found that one, the Athe¬ 
nian, was in a state of grievous oppression and 
distraction under Pisistratus, the son of Hippo¬ 
crates, who was at that time tyrant of Athens. 

^ The race (their name merely signifying “the 
Easterns”) who, in the ante-Trojan times, occu¬ 
pied the country which was afterwards called 
Boeotia. 


Hippocrates, when he was a private citizen, is 
said to have gone once upon a time to Olympia 
to see the Games, when a wonderful prodigy 
happened to him. As he was employed in sacri¬ 
ficing, the cauldrons which stood near, full of 
water and of the flesh of the victims, began to 
boil without the help of fire, so that the water 
overflowed the pots. Chilon the Lacedaemoni¬ 
an, who happened to be there and to witness 
the prodigy, advised Hippocrates, if he were 
unmarried, never to take into his house a wife 
who could bear him a child; if he already had 
one, to send her back to her friends; if he had 
a son, to disown him. Chilon’s advice did not 
at all please Hippocrates, who disregarded it, 
and some time after became the father of Pisis¬ 
tratus. This Pisistratus, at a time when there 
was civil contention in Attica between the par¬ 
ty of the Sea-coast headed by Megacles the son 
of Alcmxon, and that of the Plain headed by 
Lycurgus, one of the Aristolaids, formed the 
project of making himself tyrant, and with this 
view created a third party. Gathering together 
a band of partisans, and giving himself out for 
the protector of the Highlanders, he contrived 
the following stratagem. He wounded himself 
and his mules, and then drove his chariot into 
the market-place, professing to have just es¬ 
caped an attack of his enemies, who had at¬ 
tempted his life as he was on his way into the 
country. He besought the people to assign him 
a guard to protect his person, reminding them 
of the glory which he had gained when he led 
the attack upon the Megarians, and took the 
town of Nisaea, at the same time performing 
many other exploits. The Athenians, deceived 
by his story, appointed him a band of citizens 
to serve as a guard, who were to carry clubs in¬ 
stead of spears, and to accompany him wher¬ 
ever he went. Thus strengthened, Pisistratus 
broke into revolt and seized the citadel. In this 
way he acquired the sovereignty of Athens, 
which he continued to hold without disturbing 
the previously existing offices or altering any of 
the laws. He administered the state according 
to the established usages, and his arrangements 
were wise and salutary. 

60. However, after a little time, the partisans 
of Megacles and those of Lycurgus agreed to 
forget their differences, and united to drive 
him out. So Pisistratus, having by the means 
described first made himself master of Athens, 
lost his power again before it had time to take 
root. No sooner, however, was he departed 
than the factions which had driven him out 
quarrelled anew, and at last Megacles, wearied 


I 




57-63] THE HISTORY 13 


with the struggle, sent a herald to Pisistratus, 
with an offer to re-establish him on the throne 
if he would marry his daughter. Pisistratus 
consented, and on these terms an agreement 
was concluded between the two, after which 
they proceeded to devise the mode of his resto¬ 
ration. And here the device on which they hit 
was the silliest that I find on record, more es¬ 
pecially considering that the Greeks have been 
from very ancient times distinguished from the 
barbarians by superior sagacity and freedom 
from foolish simj)leness, and remembering 
that the persons on whom this trick was played 
were not only Greeks but Athenians, who have 
the credit of surpassing all other Greeks in 
cleverness. There was in the Pxanian district a 
woman named Phya, whose height only fell 
short of four cubits by three fingers’ breadth, 
and who was altogether comely to look upon. 
This woman they clothed in complete armour, 
and, instructing her as to the carriage which 
she was to maintain in order to beseem her 
part, they placed her in a chariot and drove to 
the city. Heralds had been sent forward to pre¬ 
cede her, and to make proclamation to this ef¬ 
fect: “Citizens of Athens, receive again Pisis¬ 
tratus with friendly minds. Minerva, who of all 
men honours him the most, herself conducts 
him back to her own citadel.” This they pro¬ 
claimed in all directions, and immediately the 
rumour spread throughout the country dis¬ 
tricts that Minerva was bringing back her fa¬ 
vourite. They of the city also, fully persuaded 
that the woman was the veritable goddess, 
prostrated themselves before her, and received 
Pisistratus back. 

61. Pisistratus, having thus recovered the 
sovereignty, married, according to agreement, 
the daughter of Megacles. As, however, he had 
already a family of grown up sons, and the 
Alcmaeonidae were supposed to be under a 
curse, he determined that there should be no 
issue of the marriage. His wife at first kept this 
matter to herself, but after a time, either her 
mother questioned her, or it may be that she 
told it of her own accord. At any rate, she in¬ 
formed her mother, and so it reached her fa¬ 
ther’s ears. Megacles, indignant at receiving an 
affront from such a quarter, in his anger in¬ 
stantly made up his differences with the oppo¬ 
site faction, on which Pisistratus, aware of 
what was planning against him, took himself 
out of the country. Arrived at Eretria, he held 
a council with his children to decide what was 
to be done. The opinion of Hippias prevailed, 
and it was agreed to aim at regaining the sov¬ 


ereignty The first step was to obtain advances 
of money from such states as were under obli¬ 
gations to them. By these means they collected 
large sums from several countries, especially 
from the Thebans, who gave them far more 
than any of the rest. To be brief, time passed, 
and all was at length got ready for their return. 
A band of Argive mercenaries arrived from the 
Peloponnese, and a certain Naxian named 
Lygdamis, who volunteered his services, was 
particularly zealous in the cause, supplying 
both men and money. 

62. In the eleventh year of their exile the 
family of Pisistratus set sail from Eretria on 
their return home. They made the coast of At¬ 
tica, near Marathon, where they encamped, 
and were joined by their partisans from the 
capital and by numbers from the country dis¬ 
tricts, who loved tyranny better than freedom. 
At Athens, while Pisistratus was obtaining 
funds, and even after he landed at Marathon, 
no one paid any attention to his proceedings. 
When, however, it became known that he had 
left Marathon, and was marching upon the 
city, preparations were made for resistance, the 
whole force of the state was levied, and led 
against the returning exiles. Meantime the 
army of Pisistratus, which had broken up from 
Marathon, meeting their adversaries near the 
temple of the Pallenian Minerva, pitched their 
camp opposite them. Here a certain soothsayer, 
Amphilytus by name, an Acarnanian, moved 
by a divine impulse, came into the presence of 
Pisistratus, and approaching him uttered this 
prophecy in the hexameter measure:— 

Now has the cast been made, the net is out-spread 

in the water, 

Through the moonshiny night the tunnies will 

enter the meshes. 

63. Such was the prophecy uttered under a 
divine inspiration. Pisistratus, apprehending 
its meaning, declared that he accepted the ora¬ 
cle, and instantly led on his army. The Athe¬ 
nians from the city had just finished their mid¬ 
day meal, after which they had betaken them¬ 
selves, some to dice, others to sleep, when Pisis¬ 
tratus with his troops fell upon them and put 
them to the rout. As soon as the flight began, 
Pisistratus bethought himself of a most wise 
contrivance, whereby the Athenians might be 
induced to disperse and not unite in a body any 
more. He mounted his sons on horseback and 
sent them on in front to overtake the fugitives, 
and exhort them to be of good cheer, and re¬ 
turn each man to his home. The Athenians 


14 HERODOTUS f Book i 


took the advice, and Pisistratus became for the 
third time master of Athens. 

64. Upon this he set himself to root his 
power more firmly, by the aid of a numerous 
body of mercenaries, and by keeping up a full 
exchequer, partly supplied from native sources, 
partly from the countries about the river Stry- 
mon. He also demanded hostages from many 
of the Athenians who had remained at home, 
and not left Athens at his approach; and these 
he sent to Naxos, which he had conquered by 
force of arms, and given over into the charge of 
Lygdamis. Farther, he purified the island of 
Delos, according to the injunctions of an ora¬ 
cle, after the following fashion. All the dead 
bodies which had been interred within sight of 
the temple he dug up, and removed to another 
part of the isle. Thus was the tyranny of Pisis¬ 
tratus established at Athens, many of the Athe¬ 
nians having fallen in the battle, and many 
others having fled the country together with 
the son of Alcmaeon. 

65. Such was the condition of the Athenians 
when Croesus made inquiry concerning them. 
Proceeding to seek information concerning the 
Lacedaemonians, he learnt that, after passing 
through a period of great depression, they had 
lately been victorious in a war with the people 
of Tegea; for, during the joint reign of Leo and 
Agasicles, kings of Sparta, the Lacedaemon¬ 
ians, successful in all their other wars, suffered 
continual defeat at the hands of the Tegeans. 
At a still earlier period they had been the very 
worst governed people in Greece, as well in 
matters of internal management as in their re¬ 
lations towards foreigners, from whom they 
kept entirely aloof. The circumstances which 
led to their being well governed were the fol¬ 
lowing:—Lycurgus, a man of distinction 
among the Spartans, had gone to Delphi, to 
visit the oracle. Scarcely had he entered into 
the inner fane, when the Pythoness exclaimed 
aloud, 

Ohl thou great Lycurgus, that com*st to my 
beautiful dwelling. 

Dear to ]ove, and to all who sit in the halls 
of Olympus, 

Whether to hail thee a god I \now not, or only 
a mortal, 

But my hope is strong that a god thou wilt 
prove, Lycurgus. 

Some report besides, that the Pythoness de¬ 
livered to him the entire system of laws which 
are still observed by the Spartans. The Lace¬ 
daemonians, however, themselves assert that Ly¬ 


curgus, when he was guardian of his nephew, 
Labotas, king of Sparta, and regent in his 
room, introduced them from Crete; for as soon 
as he became regent, he altered the whole of 
the existing customs, substituting new ones, 
which he took care should be observed by all. 
After this he arranged whatever appertained 
to war, establishing the Enomotiae, Triacades, 
and Syssitia, besides which he instituted the 
senate,^ and the ephoralty. Such was the way 
in which the Lacedaemonians became a well- 
governed people. 

66. On the death of Lycurgus they built him 

a temple, and ever since they have worshipped 
him with the utmost reverence. Their soil be- , 
ing good and the population numerous, they 
sprang up rapidly to power, and became a 
flourishing people. In consequence they soon 
ceased to be satisfied to stay quiet; and, regard¬ 
ing the Arcadians as very much their inferiors, 
they sent to consult the oracle about conquer¬ 
ing the whole of Arcadia. The Pythoness thus I 
answered them; * 

Gravest thou Arcady? Bold is thy craving. 1 shall \ 
not content it. 

Many the men that in Arcady dwell, whose food | 
is the acorn — 

They will never allow thee. It is not I that am 
niggard. 

I will give thee to dance in Tegea, with noisy 
foot-fall. 

And with the measuring line mete out the glori- • 

ous champaign. ' 

When the Lacedaemonians received this reply, ' 
leaving the rest of Arcadia untouched, they 1 
marched against the Tegeans, carrying with 
them fetters, so confident had this oracle 
(which was, in truth, but of base metal) made 
them that they would enslave the Tegeans. 
The battle, however, went against them, and 
many fell into the enemy’s hands. Then these 
persons, wearing the fetters which they had 
themselves brought, and fastened together in a 
string, measured the Tegean plain as they exe- I 
cuted their labours. The fetters in which they 
worked were still, in my day, preserved at 
Tegea where they hung round the walls of the 
temple of Minerva Alea. 

67. Throughout the whole of this early con¬ 
test with the Tegeans, the Lacedsemonians met 
with nothing but defeats; but in the time of 

^ It is quite inconceivable that Lycurgus should | 
in any sense have instituted the senate. Lycurgus 
appears to have made scarcely any changes in the 
constitution. What he did was to alter the cus¬ 
toms and habits of the people. 








64 - 69 ] THE HISTORY 15 


CrcEsus, under the kings Anaxandrides and 
Aristo, fortune had turned in their favour, in 
the manner which I will now relate. Having 
been worsted in every engagement by their 
enemy, they sent to Delphi, and inquired of 
the oracle what god they must propitiate to pre¬ 
vail in the war against the Tegeans. The an¬ 
swer of the Pythoness was that before they 
could prevail, they must remove to Sparta the 
bones of Orestes, the son of Agamemnon. Un¬ 
able to discover his burial-place, they sent a 
second time, and asked the god where the body 
of the hero had been laid. The following was 
the answer they received:— 

Level and smooth is the plain where Arcadian 
Tegea standeth; 

There two winds are ever, by strong necessity, 
blowing, 

Counter-strok^e answers strohje, and evil lies upon 
evil. 

There all-teeming Earth doth harbour the son of 
Atrides; 

Bring thou him to thy city, and then be Tegeans 
master. 

After this reply, the Lacedaemonians were no 
nearer discovering the burial-place than before, 
though they continued to search for it dili¬ 
gently; until at last a man named Lichas, one 
of the Spartans called Agathoergi, found it. 
The Agathoergi are citizens who have just 
served their time among the knights. The five 
eldest of the knights go out every year, and are 
bound during the year after their discharge to 
go wherever the State sends them, and actively 
employ themselves in its service. 

68. Lichas was one of this body when, partly 
by good luck, partly by his own wisdom, he 
discovered the burial-place. Intercourse be¬ 
tween the two States existing just at this time, 
he went to Tegea, and, happening to enter into 
the workshop of a smith, he saw him forging 
some iron. As he stood marvelling at what 
he beheld,^ he was observed by the smith 
who, leaving off his work, went up to him 
and said, 

“Certainly, then, you Spartan stranger, you 
would have been wonderfully surprised if you 
had seen what I have, since you make a marvel 
even of the working in iron. I wanted to make 
myself a well in this room, and began to dig it, 
when what think you.!^ I came upon a coffin 
seven cubits long. I had never believed that 
men were taller in the olden times than they 
are now, so I opened the coffin. The body inside 
^ Herodotus means to represent that the forging 
of iron was a novelty at the time. 


was of the same length: I measured it, and 
filled up the hole again.” 

Such was the man’s account of what he had 
seen. The other, on turning the matter over in 
his mind, conjectured that this was the body 
of Orestes, of which the oracle had spoken. He 
guessed so, because he observed that the smithy 
had two bellows, which he understood to be 
the two winds, and the hammer and anvil 
would do for the stroke and the counterstroke, 
and the iron that was being wrought for the 
evil lying upon evil. This he imagined might 
be so because iron had been discovered to the 
hurt of man. Full of these conjectures, he sped 
back to Sparta and laid the whole matter be¬ 
fore his countrymen. Soon after, by a concerted 
plan, they brought a charge against him, and 
began a prosecution. Lichas betook himself to 
Tegea, and on his arrival acquainted the smith 
with his misfortune, and proposed to rent his 
room of him. The smith refused for some 
time; but at last Lichas persuaded him, and 
took up his abode in it. Then he opened the 
grave, and collecting the bones, returned with 
them to Sparta. From henceforth, whenever 
the Spartans and the Tegeans made trial of 
each other’s skill in arms, the Spartans always 
had greatly the advantage; and by the time to 
which we are now come they were masters of 
most of the Peloponnese. 

69. Croesus, informed of all these circum¬ 
stances, sent messengers to Sparta, with gifts 
in their hands, who were to ask the Spartans 
to enter into alliance with him. They received 
strict injunctions as to what they should say, 
and on their arrival at Sparta spake as fol¬ 
lows:— 

“Croesus, king of the Lydians and of other 
nations, has sent us to speak thus to you: ‘Oh! 
Lacediemonians, the god has bidden me to 
make the Greek my friend; I therefore apply to 
you, in conformity with the oracle, knowing 
that you hold the first rank in Greece, and de¬ 
sire to become your friend and ally in all true 
faith and honesty.’ ” 

Such was the message which Croesus sent by 
his heralds. The Lacedaemonians, who were 
aware beforehand of the reply given him by the 
oracle, were full of joy at the coming of the 
messengers, and at once took the oaths of 
friendship and alliance: this they did the more 
readily as they had previously contracted cer¬ 
tain obligations towards him. They had sent 
to Sardis on one occasion to purchase some 
gold, intending to use it on a statue of Apollo 
—the statue, namely, which remains to this 


16 HERODOTUS [Book i 


day at Thornax in Laconia, when CrcEsus, 
hearing of the matter, gave them as a gift the 
gold which they wanted. 

70. This was one reason why the Lacedae¬ 
monians were so willing to make the alliance; 
another was, because Croesus had chosen them 
for his friends in preference to all the other 
Greeks. They therefore held themselves in 
rcadines^i to come at his summons, and not con¬ 
tent with so doing, they further had a huge 
vase made in bronze, covered with figures of 
animals all round the outside of the rim, and 
large enough to contain three hundred am¬ 
phorae, which they sent to Croesus as a return 
for his presents to them. The vase, however, 
never reached Sardis. Its miscarriage is ac¬ 
counted for in two quite different ways. The 
Lacedaemonian story is that when it reached 
Samos, on its way towards Sardis, the Samians 
having knowledge of it, put to sea in their 
ships of war and made it their prize. But the 
Samians declare that the Lacedaemonians who 
had the vase in charge, happening to arrive too 
late, and learning that Sardis had fallen and 
that Croesus was a prisoner, sold it in their 
island, and the purchasers (who were, they say, 
private persons) made an offering of it at the 
shrine of Juno: the sellers were very likely on 
their return to Sparta to have said that they 
had been robbed of it by the Samians. Such, 
then, was the fate of the vase. 

71. Meanwhile Croesus, taking the oracle in 
a wrong sense, led his forces into Cappadocia, 
fully expecting to defeat Cyrus and destroy the 
empire of the Persians. While he was still en¬ 
gaged in making preparations for his attack, 
a Lydian named Sandanis, who had always 
been looked upon as a wise man, but who after 
this obtained a very great name indeed among 
his countrymen, came forward and counselled 
the king in these words: 

“Thou art about, oh! king, to make war 
against men who wear leathern trousers, and 
have all their other garments of leather; who 
feed not on what they like, but on what they 
can get from a soil that is sterile and unkindly; 
who do not indulge in wine, but drink water; 
who possess no figs nor anything else that is 
good to eat. If, then, thou conquerest them, 
what canst thou get from them, seeing that 
they have nothing at all.^ But if they conquer 
thee, consider how much that is precious thou 
wilt lose: if they once get a taste of our pleasant 
things, they will keep such hold of them that 
we shall never be able to make them loose their 
grasp. For my part, I am thankful to the gods 


that they have not put it into the hearts of the 
Persians to invade Lydia.” 

Croesus was not persuaded by this speech, 
though it was true enough; for before the con¬ 
quest of Lydia, the Persians possessed none of 
the luxuries or delights of life. 

72. The Cappadocians are known to the 
Greeks by the name of Syrians. Before the rise 
of the Persian power, they had been subject to 
the Medes; but at the present time they were 
within the empire of Cyrus, for the boundary 
between the Median and the Lydian empires 
was the river Halys. This stream, which rises 
in the mountain country of Armenia, runs 
first through Cilicia; afterwards it flows for a 
while with the Matieni on the right, and the 
Phrygians on the left: then, when they are 
passed, it proceeds with a northern course, sep¬ 
arating the Cappadocian Syrians from the 
Paphlagonians, who occupy the left bank, thus 
forming the boundary of almost the whole of 
Lower Asia, from the sea opposite Cyprus to 
the Euxine. Just there is the neck of the penin¬ 
sula, a journey of five days across for an active 
walker. 

73. There were two motives which led Croe¬ 
sus to attack Cappadocia: firstly, he coveted 
the land, which he wished to add to his own 
dominions; but the chief reason was that he 
wanted to revenge on Cyrus the wrongs of 
Astyages, and was made confident by the ora¬ 
cle of being able so to do: for Astyages, son 
of Cyaxares and king of the Medes, who had 
been dethroned by Cyrus, son of Cambyses, 
was Croesus’ brother by marriage. This mar¬ 
riage had taken place under circumstances 
which I will now relate. A band of Scythian I 
nomads, who had left their own land on occa¬ 
sion of some disturbance, had taken refuge in ! 
Media. Cyaxares, son of Phraortes, and grand- * 
son of De’ioces, was at that time king of the | 
country. Recognising them as suppliants, he i 
began by treating them with kindness, and ^ 
coming presently to esteem them highly, he in¬ 
trusted to their care a number of boys, whom 
they were to teach their language and to in¬ 
struct in the use of the bow. Time passed, and i 
the Scythians employed themselves, day after I 
day, in hunting, and always brought home | 
some game; but at last it chanced that one day 
they took nothing. On their return to Cyaxares 
with empty hands, that monarch, who was 
hot-tempered, as he showed upon the occasion, ' 
received them very rudely and insultingly. In 
consequence of this treatment, which they did 
not conceive themselves to have deserved, the 




70-77] THE HISTORY 17 


Scythians determined to take one of the boys 
whom they had in charge, cut him in pieces, 
and then dressing the flesh as they were wont 
to dress that of the wild animals, serve it up to 
Cyaxares as game: after which they resolved to 
convey themselves with all speed to Sardis, to 
the court of Alyattes, the son of Sadyattes. The 
plan was carried out: Cyaxares and his guests 
ate of the flesh prepared by the Scythians, and 
they themselves, having accomplished their 
purpose, fled to Alyattes in the guise of suppli¬ 
ants. 

74. Afterwards, on the refusal of Alyattes to 
give up his suppliants when Cyaxares sent to 
demand them of him, war broke out between 
the Lydians and the Medes, and continued for 
five years, with various success. In the course 
of it the Medes gained many victories over the 
Lydians, and the Lydians also gained many 
victories over the Medes. Among their other 
battles there was one night engagement. As, 
however, the balance had not inclined in fa¬ 
vour of either nation, another combat took 
place in the sixth year, in the course of which, 
just as the battle was growing warm, day was 
on a sudden changed into night. This event 
had been foretold by Thales, the Milesian, who 
forewarned the lonians of it, fixing for it the 
very year in which it actually took place. The 
Medes and Lydians, when they observed the 
change, ceased fighting, and were alike anx¬ 
ious to have terms of peace agreed on. Syen- 
nesis of Cilicia, and Labynetus of Babylon, 
were the persons who mediated between the 
parties, who hastened the taking of the oaths, 
and brought about the exchange of espousals. 
It was they who advised that Alyattes should 
give his daughter Aryenis in marriage to Asty- 
ages, the son of Cyaxares, knowing, as they 
did, that without some sure bond of strong ne¬ 
cessity, there is wont to be but little security in 
men’s covenants. Oaths are taken by these peo¬ 
ple in the same way as by the Greeks, except 
that they make a slight flesh wound in their 
arms, from which each sucks a portion of the 
other’s blood. 

75. Cyrus had captured this Astyages, who 
was his mother’s father, and kept him prison¬ 
er, for a reason which I shall bring forward in 
another part of my history. This capture 
formed the ground of quarrel between Cyrus 
and CrcESus, in consequence of which Crcesus 
sent his servants to ask the oracle if he should 
attack the Persians; and when an evasive an¬ 
swer came, fancying it to be in his favour, car¬ 
ried his arms into the Persian territory. When 


he reached the river Halys, he transported his 
army across it, as I maintain, by the bridges 
which exist there at the present day; but, ac¬ 
cording to the general belief of the Greeks, by 
the aid of Thales the Milesian. The tale is that 
Croesus was in doubt how he should get his 
army across, as the bridges were not made at 
that time, and that Thales, who happened to 
be in the camp, divided the stream and caused 
it to flow on both sides of the army instead of 
on the left only. This he effected thus:—Begin¬ 
ning some distance above the camp, he dug a 
deep channel, which he brought round in a 
semicircle, so that it might pass to rearward of 
the camp; and that thus the river, diverted 
from its natural course into the new channel at 
the point where this left the stream, might flow 
by the station of the army, and afterwards fall 
again into the ancient bed. In this way the 
river was split into two streams, which were 
both easily fordable. It is said by some that the 
water was entirely drained off from the natural 
bed of the river. But I am of a different opin¬ 
ion; for I do not see how, in that case, they 
could have crossed it on their return. 

76. Having passed the Halys with the forces 
under his command, Croesus entered the dis¬ 
trict of Cappadocia which is called Pteria. It 
lies in the neighbourhood of the city of Sinope 
upon the Euxine, and is the strongest position 
in the whole country thereabouts. Here Croe¬ 
sus pitched his camp, and began to ravage the 
fields of the Syrians. He besieged and took the 
chief city of the Pterians, and reduced the in¬ 
habitants to slavery: he likewise made himself 
master of the surrounding villages. Thus he 
brought ruin on the Syrians, who were guilty 
of no offence towards him. Meanwhile, Cyrus 
had levied an army and marched against Croe¬ 
sus, increasing his numbers at every step by 
the forces of the nations that lay in his way. 
Before beginning his march he had sent her¬ 
alds to the lonians, with an invitation to them 
to revolt from the Lydian king: they, however, 
had refused compliance. Cyrus, notwithstand¬ 
ing, marched against the enemy, and en¬ 
camped opposite them in the district of Pteria, 
where the trial of strength took place between 
the contending powers. The combat was hot 
and bloody, and upon both sides the number 
of the slain was great; nor had victory declared 
in favour of either party, when night came 
down upon the battle-field. Thus both armies 
fought valiantly. 

77. Croesus laid the blame of his ill success 
on the number of his troops, which fell very 


18 HERODOTUS TBooki 


short of the enemy; and as on the next day Cy¬ 
rus did not repeat the attack, he set off on his 
return to Sardis, intending to collect his allies 
and renew the contest in the spring. He meant 
to call on the Egyptians to send him aid, ac¬ 
cording to the terms of the alliance which he 
had concluded vvith Amasis, previously to his 
league with the Lacedaemonians. He intended 
also to summon to his assistance the Baby¬ 
lonians, under their king Labynetus, for they 
too were bound to him by treaty: and further, 
he meant to send word to Sparta, and appoint 
a day for the coming of their succours. Hav¬ 
ing got together these forces in addition to his 
own, he would, as soon as the winter was past 
and springtime come, march once more 
against the Persians. With these intentions 
Croesus, immediately on his return, despatched 
heralds to his various allies, with a request that 
they would join him at Sardis in the course of 
the fifth month from the time of the departure 
of his messengers. He then disbanded the army 
—consisting of mercenary troops—which had 
been engaged with the Persians and had since 
accompanied him to his capital, and let them 
depart to their homes, never imagining that 
Cyrus, after a battle in which victory had been 
so evenly balanced, would venture to march 
upon Sardis. 

78. While Croesus was still in this mind, all 
the suburbs of Sardis were found to swarm 
with snakes, on the appearance of which the 
horses left feeding in the pasture-grounds, and 
flocked to the suburbs to eat them. The king, 
who witnessed the unusual sight, regarded it 
very rightly as a prodigy. He therefore in¬ 
stantly sent messengers to the soothsayers of 
Telmessus, to consult them upon the matter. 
His m.essengers reached the city, and obtained 
from the Telmessians an explanation of what 
the prodigy portended, but fate did not allow 
them to inform their lord; for ere they entered 
Sardis on their return, Croesus was a prisoner. 
What the Telmessians had declared was that 
Croesus must look for the entry of an army of 
foreign invaders into his country, and that 
when they came they would subdue the native 
inhabitants; since the snake, said they, is a 
child of earth, and the horse a warrior and a 
foreigner. Croesus was already a prisoner when 
the Telmessians thus answered his inquiry, 
but they had no knowledge of what was taking 
place at Sardis, or of the fate of the monarch. 

79. Cyrus, however, when Croesus broke up 
so suddenly from his quarters after the battle 
at Pteria, conceiving that he had marched 


away with the intention of disbanding his 
army, considered a little, and soon saw that it 
was advisable for him to advance upon Sardis 
with all haste, before the Lydians could get 
their forces together a second time. Having 
thus determined, he lost no time in carrying 
out his plan. He marched forward with such 
speed that he was himself the first to announce 
his coming to the Lydian king. That monarch, , 
placed in the utmost difficulty by the turn of '1 
events which had gone so entirely against all 
his calculations, nevertheless led out the Lydi- j 
ans to battle. In all Asia there was not at that 'j 
time a braver or more warlike people. Their i 
manner of fighting was on horseback; they car- j! 
ried long lances, and were clever in the man- r 
agement of their steeds. ' 

80. The two armies met in the plain before 
Sardis. It is a vast flat, bare of trees, watered 
by the Hyllus and a number of other streams, 
which all flow into one larger than the rest, ' 
called the Hermus. This river rises in the sa¬ 
cred mountain of the Dindymenian Mother, 
and falls into the sea near the town of Phocaea. 

When Cyrus beheld the Lydians arranging 
themselves in order of battle on this plain, 
fearful of the strength of their cavalry, he 
adopted a device which Harpagus, one of the 
Medes, suggested to him. He collected together 
all the camels that had come in the train of his i' 
army to carry the provisions and the baggage, j 
and taking off their loads, he mounted riders |' 
upon them accoutred as horsemen. These he | 
commanded to advance in front of his other j 
troops against the Lydian horse; behind them | 
were to follow the foot soldiers, and last of all j 
the cavalry. When his arrangements were com- I 
plete, he gave his troops orders to slay all the 
other Lydians who came in their way without j 
mercy, but to spare Croesus and not kill him, 
even if he should be seized and offer resistance. 
The reason why Cyrus opposed his camels to 
the enemy’s horse was because the horse has a 
natural dread of the camel, and cannot abide | 
either the sight or the smell of that animal. By 
this stratagem he hoped to make Croesus’s 
horse useless to him, the horse being what he 
chiefly depended on for victory. The two ar¬ 
mies then joined battle, and immediately the 
Lydian war-horses, seeing and smelling the 
camels, turned round and galloped off; and so [ 
it came to pass that all Croesus’s hopes with¬ 
ered away. The Lydians, however, behaved 
manfully. As soon as they understood what 
was happening, they leaped off their horses, 
and engaged with the Persians on foot. The 






78-84] THE HISTORY 19 


combat was long; but at last, after a great 
slaughter on both sides, the Lydians turned 
and fled. They were driven within their walls, 
and the Persians laid siege to Sardis. 

8 1. Thus the siege began. Meanwhile Croe¬ 
sus, thinking that the place would hold out no 
inconsiderable time, sent oflF fresh heralds to 
his allies from the beleaguered town. His for¬ 
mer messengers had been charged to bid them 
assemble at Sardis in the course of the fifth 
month; they whom he now sent were to say 
that he was already besieged, and to beseech 
them to come to his aid with all possible speed. 
Among his other allies Croesus did not omit to 
send to Lacedaemon. 

82. It chanced, however, that the Spartans 
were themselves just at this time engaged in a 
quarrel with the Argives about a place called 
Thyrea, which was within the limits of Argo- 
lis, but had been seized on by the Lacedae¬ 
monians. Indeed, the whole country westward, 
as far as Cape Malea, belonged once to the 
Argives, and not only that entire tract upon 
the mainland, but also Cythera, and the other 
islands. The Argives collected troops to resist 
the seizure of Thyrea, but before any battle 
was fought, the two parties came to terms, and 
it was agreed that three hundred Spartans and 
three hundred Argives should meet and fight 
for the place, which should belong to the na¬ 
tion with whom the victory rested. It was stip¬ 
ulated also that the other troops on each side 
should return home to their respective coun¬ 
tries, and not remain to witness the combat, as 
there was danger, if the armies stayed, that 
either the one or the other, on seeing their 
countrymen undergoing defeat, might hasten 
to their assistance. These terms being agreed 
on, the two armies marched off, leaving three 
hundred picked men on each side to fight for 
the territory. The battle began, and so equal 
were the combatants, that at the close of the 
day, when night put a stop to the fight, of the 
whole six hundred only three men remained 
alive, two Argives, Alcanor and Chromius, 
and a single Spartan, Othryadas. The two Ar¬ 
gives, regarding themselves as the victors, hur¬ 
ried to Argos. Othryadas, the Spartan, re¬ 
mained upon the field, and, stripping the bod¬ 
ies of the Argives who had fallen, carried their 
armour to the Spartan camp. Next day the two 
armies returned to learn the result. At first 
they disputed, both parties claiming the vic¬ 
tory, the one, because they had the greater 
number of survivors; the other, because their 
man remained on the field, and stripped the 


bodies of the slain, whereas the two men of 
the other side ran away; but at last they fell 
from words to blows, and a battle was fought, 
in which both parties suffered great loss, but 
at the end the Lacedaemonians gained the vic¬ 
tory. Upon this the Argives, who up to that 
time had worn their hair long, cut it off 
close, and made a law, to which they attached 
a curse, binding themselves never more to 
let their hair grow, and never to allow their 
women to wear gold, until they should recover 
Thyrea. At the same time the Lacedemonians 
made a law the very reverse of this, namely, to 
wear their hair long, though they had always 
before cut it close. Othryadas himself, it is 
said, the sole survivor of the three hundred, 
prevented by a sense of shame from returning 
to Sparta after all his comrades had fallen, laid 
violent hands upon himself in Thyrea. 

83. Although the Spartans were engaged 
with these matters when the herald arrived 
from Sardis to entreat them to come to the as¬ 
sistance of the besieged king, yet, notwith¬ 
standing, they instantly set to work to afford 
him help. They had completed their prepara¬ 
tions, and the ships were just ready to start, 
when a second message informed them that 
the place had already fallen, and that Croesus 
was a prisoner. Deeply grieved at his misfor¬ 
tune, the Spartans ceased their efforts. 

84. The following is the way in which Sar¬ 
dis was taken. On the fourteenth day of the 
siege Cyrus bade some horsemen ride about his 
lines, and make proclamation to the whole 
army that he would give a reward to the man 
who should first mount the wall. After this he 
made an assault, but without success. His 
troops retired, but a certain Mardian, Hyroea- 
des by name, resolved to approach the citadel 
and attempt it at a place where no guards were 
ever set. On this side the rock was so precipi¬ 
tous, and the citadel (as it seemed) so impreg¬ 
nable, that no fear was entertained of its being 
carried in this place. Here was the only portion 
of the circuit round which their old king Mcles 
did not carry the lion which his leman bore to 
him. For when the Telmessians had declared 
that if the lion were taken round the defences, 
Sardis would be impregnable, and Meles, in 
consequence, carried it round the rest of the 
fortress where the citadel seemed open to at¬ 
tack, he scorned to take it round this side, 
which he looked on as a sheer precipice, and 
therefore absolutely secure. It is on that side of 
the city which faces Mount Tmolus. Hyroea- 
des, however, having the day before observed 


20 

a Lydian soldier descend the rock after a heh 
met that had rolled down from the top, and 
having seen him pick it up and carry it back, 
thought over what he had witnessed, and 
formed his plan. He climbed the rock himself, 
and other Persians followed in his track, until a 
large number had mounted to the top. Thus was 
Sardis taken, and given up entirely to pillage. 

85. With respect to Creesus himself, this is 
what befell him at the taking of the town. He 
had a son, of whom I made mention above, a 
worthy youth, whose only defect was that he 
was deaf and dumb. In the days of his prosper¬ 
ity Croesus had done the utmost that he could 
for him, and among other plans which he had 
devised, had sent to Delphi to consult the ora¬ 
cle on his behalf. The answer which he had re¬ 
ceived from the Pythoness ran thus:— 

Lydian, widc-rnling monarchy thou wondrous 

simple Croesus, 

Wish not ever to hear in thy palace the voice thou 

hast prayed for 

Uttering intelligent sounds. Far better thy son 

should be silent! . 

Ah! woe worth the day when thine ear shall first 

list to his accents. 

When the town was taken, one of the Per¬ 
sians was just going to kill Croesus, not know¬ 
ing who he was. Croesus saw the man coming, 
but under the pressure of his affliction, did not 
care to avoid the blow, not minding whether 
or no he died beneath the stroke. Then this 
son of his, who was voiceless, beholding the 
Persian as he rushed towards Croesus, in the 
agony of his fear and grief burst into speech, 
and said, “Man, do not kill Croesus.” This was 
the first time that he had ever spoken a word, 
but afterwards he retained the power of speech 
for the remainder of his life. 

86. Thus was Sardis taken by the Persians, 
and Croesus himself fell into their hands, after 
having reigned fourteen years, and been be¬ 
sieged in his capital fourteen days; thus too did 
Croesus fulfill the oracle, which said that he 
should destroy a mighty empire—by destroy¬ 
ing his own. Then the Persians who had made 
Croesus prisoner brought him before Cyrus. 
Now a vast pile had been raised by his orders, 
and Croesus, laden with fetters, was placed 
upon it, and with him twice seven of the sons 
of the Lydians. I know not whether Cyrus was 
minded to make an offering of the first-fruits 
to some god or other, or whether he had vowed 
a vow and was performing it, or whether, as 
may well be, he had heard that Croesus was a 
holy man, and so wished to see if any of the 


[ Book 1 

heavenly powers would appear to save him 
from being burnt alive. However it might be, 
Cyrus was thus engaged, and Croesus was al¬ 
ready on the pile, when it entered his mind 
in the depth of his woe that there was a divine 
warning in the words which had come to him 
from the lips of Solon, “No one while he lives I 
is happy.” When this thought smote him he 
fetched a long breath, and breaking his deep 
silence, groaned out aloud, thrice uttering the 
name of Solon. Cyrus caught the sounds, and 
bade the interpreters inquire of Croesus who it 
was he called on. They drew near and asked ! 
him, but he held his peace, and for a long time 
made no answer to their questionings, until at 
length, forced to say something, he exclaimed, 
“One I would give much to see converse with I 
every monarch.” Not knowing what he meant 
by this reply, the interpreters begged him to 
explain himself; and as they pressed for an an¬ 
swer, and grew to be troublesome, he told 
them how, a long time before, Solon, an Athen¬ 
ian, had come and seen all his splendour, and 
made light of it; and how whatever he had 
said to him had fallen out exactly as he fore¬ 
showed, although it was nothing that especial¬ 
ly concerned him, but applied to all mankind 
alike, and most to those who seemed to them¬ 
selves happy. Meanwhile, as he thus spoke, the 
pile was lighted, and the outer portion began 
to blaze. Then Cyrus, hearing from the inter¬ 
preters what Croesus had said, relented, be¬ 
thinking himself that he too was a man, and 
that it was a fellow-man, and one who had 1 
once been as blessed by fortune as himself, that 1 
he was burning alive; afraid, moreover, of ret- ' 
ribution, and full of the thought that whatever 
is human is insecure. So he bade them quench I 
the blazing fire as quickly as they could, and -j 
take down Croesus and the other Lydians, | 
which they tried to do, but the flames were not 
to be mastered. 

87. Then, the Lydians say that Croesus, per¬ 
ceiving by the efforts made to quench the fire t 
that Cyrus had relented, and seeing also that ^ 
all was in vain, and that the men could not get 
the fire under, called with a loud voice upon 
the god Apollo, and prayed him, if he ever re¬ 
ceived at his hands any acceptable gift, to come 
to his aid, and deliver him from his present 
danger. As thus with tears he besought the 
god, suddenly, though up to that time the sky 
had been clear and the day without a breath of 
wind, dark clouds gathered, and the storm ‘ 
burst over their heads with rain of such vio¬ 
lence, that the flames were speedily extin- 


HERODOTUS 






85 - 91 ] THE HISTORY 21 


guished. Cyrus, convinced by this that Croesus 
was a good man and a favourite of heaven, 
asked him after he was taken ofiF the pile, 
“Who it was that had persuaded him to lead 
an army into his country, and so become his 
foe rather than continue his friend?” to which 
Croesus made answer as follows: “What I did, 
oh! king, was to thy advantage and to my own 
loss. If there be blame, it rests with the god of 
the Greeks, who encouraged me to begin the 
war. No one is so foolish as to prefer war to 
peace, in which, instead of sons burying their 
fathers, fathers bury their sons. But the gods 
willed it so.” 

88. Thus did Croesus speak. Cyrus then ord¬ 
ered his fetters to be taken off, and made him 
sit down near himself, and paid him much re¬ 
spect, looking upon him, as did also the cour¬ 
tiers, with a sort of wonder. Croesus, wrapped 
in thought, uttered no word. After a while, 
happening to turn and perceive the Persian 
soldiers engaged in plundering the town, he 
said to Cyrus, “May I now tell thee, oh! king, 
what I have in my mind, or is silence best?” 
Cyrus bade him speak his mind boldly. Then 
he put this question: “What is it, oh! Cyrus, 
which those men yonder are doing so busily?” 
“Plundering thy city,” Cyrus answered, “and 
carrying off thy riches.” “Not my city,” re¬ 
joined the other, “nor my riches. They are not 
mine any more. It is thy wealth which they are 
pillaging.” 

89. Cyrus, struck by what Croesus had said, 
bade all the court to withdraw, and then asked 
Croesus what he thought it best for him to do 
as regarded the plundering. Croesus answered, 
“Now that the gods have made me thy slave, 
oh! Cyrus, it seems to me that it is my part, if 
I see anything to thy advantage, to show it to 
thee. Thy subjects, the Persians, are a poor peo¬ 
ple with a proud spirit. If then thou lettest 
them pillage and possess themselves of great 
wealth, I will tell thee what thou hast to expect 
at their hands. The man who gets the most, 
look to having him rebel against thee. Now 
then, if my words please thee, do thus, oh! 
king:—Let some of thy bodyguards be placed 
as sentinels at each of the city gates, and let 
them take their booty from the soldiers as they 
leave the town, and tell them that they do so 
because the tenths are due to Jupiter. So wilt 
thou escape the hatred they would feel if the 
plunder were taken away from them by force; 
and they, seeing that what is proposed is just, 
will do it willingly.” 

90. Cyrus was beyond measure pleased with 


this advice, so excellent did it seem to him. He 
praised Crcesus highly, and gave orders to his 
bodyguard to do as he had suggested. Then, 
turning to Crcesus, he said, “Oh! Croesus, I see 
that thou are resolved both in speech and act 
to show thyself a virtuous prince: ask me, 
therefore, whatever thou wilt as a gift at this 
moment.” Croesus replied, “Oh! my lord, if 
thou wilt suffer me to send these fetters to the 
god of the Greeks, whom I once honoured 
above all other gods, and ask him if it is his 
wont to deceive his benefactors—that will be 
the highest favour thou canst confer on me.” 
Cyrus upon this inquired what charge he had 
to make against the god. Then Croesus gave 
him a full account of all his projects, and of the 
answers of the oracle, and of the offerings 
which he had sent, on which he dwelt espe¬ 
cially, and told him how it was the encourage¬ 
ment given him by the oracle which had led 
him to make war upon Persia. All this he re¬ 
lated, and at the end again besought permis¬ 
sion to reproach the god with his behaviour. 
Cyrus answered with a laugh, “This I readily 
grant thee, and whatever else thou shalt at any 
time ask at my hands.” Crcesus, finding his re¬ 
quest allowed, sent certain Lydians to Delphi, 
enjoining them to lay his fetters upon the 
threshold of the temple, and ask the god, “If he 
were not ashamed of having encouraged him, 
as the destined destroyer of the empire of Cy¬ 
rus, to begin a war with Persia, of which such 
were the first-fruits?” As they said this they 
were to point to the fetters; and further they 
were to inquire, “If it was the wont of the 
Greek gods to be ungrateful?” 

91. The Lydians went to Delphi and de¬ 
livered their message, on which the Pythoness 
is said to have replied—“It is not possible even 
for a god to escape the decree of destiny. Crce¬ 
sus has been punished for the sin of his fifth 
ancestor, who, when he was one of the body¬ 
guard of the Heraclides, joined in a woman’s 
fraud, and, slaying his master, wrongfully 
seized the throne. Apollo was anxious that the 
fall of Sardis should not happen in the lifetime 
of Crcesus, but be delayed to his son’s days; he 
could not, however, persuade the Fates. All 
that they were willing to allow he took and 
gave to Crcesus. Let Crcesus know that Apollo 
delayed the taking of Sardis three full years, 
and that he is thus a prisoner three years later 
than was his destiny. Moreover it was Apollo 
who saved him from the burning pile. Nor has 
Crcesus any right to complain with respect to 
the oracular answer which he received. For 


22 HERODOTUS [ Book i 


when the god told him that, if he attacked the 
Persians, he would destroy a mighty empire, he 
ought, if he had been wise, to have sent again 
and inquired which empire was meant, that 
of Cyrus or his own; but if he neither under¬ 
stood what was said, nor took the trouble to 
seek for enlightenment, he has only himself to 
blame for the result. Besides, he had misunder¬ 
stood the last answer which had been given 
him about the mule. Cyrus was that mule. For 
the parents of Cyrus were of difTerent races, 
and of different conditions—his mother a 
Median princess, daughter of King Astyages, 
and his father a Persian and a subject, who, 
though so far beneath her in all respects, had 
married his royal mistress.” 

Such was the answer of the Pythoness. The 
Lydians returned to Sardis and communicated 
it to Croesus, who confessed, on hearing it, 
that the fault was his, not the god’s. Such was 
the way in which Ionia was first conquered, 
and so was the empire of Croesus brought to 
a close. 

92. Besides the offerings which have been 
already mentioned, there are many others in 
various parts of Greece presented by Croesus; 
as at Thebes in Boeotia, where there is a golden 
tripod, dedicated by him to Ismenian Apollo; 
at Ephesus, where the golden heifers, and most 
of the columns are his gift; and at Delphi, in 
the temple of Pronaia, where there is a huge 
shield in gold, which he gave. All these offer¬ 
ings were still in existence in my day; many 
others have perished: among them those which 
he dedicated at Branchidae in Milesia, equal 
in weight, as I am informed, and in all respects 
like to those at Delphi. The Delphian presents, 
and those sent to Amphiaraiis, came from his 
own private property, being the first-fruits of 
the fortune which he inherited from his father; 
his other offerings came from the riches of an 
enemy, who, before he mounted the throne, 
headed a party against him, with the view of 
obtaining the crown of Lydia for Pantaleon. 
This Pantaleon was a son of Alyattes, but by 
a different mother from Croesus; for the 
mother of Croesus was a Carian woman, but 
the mother of Pantaleon an Ionian. When, by 
the appointment of his father, Croesus ob¬ 
tained the kingly dignity, he seized the man 
who had plotted against him, and broke him 
upon the wheel. His property, which he had 
previously devoted to the service of the gods, 
Croesus applied in the way mentioned above. 
This is all I shall say about his offerings. 

93. Lydia, unlike most other countries. 


scarcely offers any wonders for the historian to 
describe, except the gold-dust which is washed 
down from the range of Tmolus. It has, how¬ 
ever, one structure of enormous size, only in¬ 
ferior to the monuments of Egypt and Baby¬ 
lon. This is the tomb of Alyattes, the father of 
Croesus, the base of which is formed of im¬ 
mense blocks of stone, the rest being a vast 
mound of earth. It was raised by the joint la¬ 
bour of the tradesmen, handicraftsmen, and , 
courtesans of Sardis, and had at the top five 
stone pillars, which remained to my day, with 
inscriptions cut on them, showing how much 
of the work was done by each class of work¬ 
people. It appeared on measurement that the 
portion of the courtesans was the largest. The ^ 
daughters of the common people in Lydia, one ! 
and all, pursue this traffic, wishing to collect . 
money for their portions. They continue the 1 
practice till they marry; and are wont to con- ' 
tract themselves in marriage. The tomb is six 
stades and two plethra in circumference; its 
breadth is thirteen plethra. Close to the tomb | 
is a large lake, which the Lydians say is never l 
dry. They call it the Lake Gygsea. | 

94. The Lydians have very nearly the same . 
customs as the Greeks, with the exception that I 
these last do not bring up their girls in the same | 
way. So far as we have any knowledge, they 1 
were the first nation to introduce the use of | 
gold and silver coin, and the first who sold . 
goods by retail. They claim also the invention 
of all the games which are common to them 
with the Greeks. These they declare that they 
invented about the time when they colonised 
Tyrrhenia, an event of which they give the 
following account. In the days of Atys, the son , 
of Manes, there was great scarcity through the | 
whole land of Lydia. For some time the Lyd¬ 
ians bore the affliction patiently, but finding j 
that it did not pass away, they set to work to 
devise remedies for the evil. Various expedi¬ 
ents were discovered by various persons; dice, 
and huckle-bones, and ball, and all such games , 
were invented, except tables, the invention of 
which they do not claim as theirs. The plan 
adopted against the famine was to engage in 
games one day so entirely as not to feel any ‘ 
craving for food, and the next day to eat and 
abstain from games. In this way they passed 1 
eighteen years. Still the affliction continued | 
and even became more grievous. So the king 
determined to divide the nation in half, and to ■ 
make the two portions draw lots, the one to 
stay, the other to leave the land. He would 
continue to reign over those whose lot it should 








92 - 98 ] THE HISTORY 23 


be to remain behind; the emigrants should 
have his son Tyrrhenus for their leader. The 
lot was cast, and they who had to emigrate 
went down to Smyrna, and built themselves 
ships, in which, after they had put on board all 
needful stores, they sailed away in search of 
new homes and better sustenance. After sailing 
past many countries they came to Umbria, 
where they built cities for themselves, and fixed 
their residence. Their former name of Lydians 
they laid aside, and called themselves after the 
name of the king’s son, who led the colony, 
Tyrrhenians. 

95. Thus far I have been engaged in show¬ 
ing how the Lydians were brought under the 
Persian yoke. The course of my history now 
compels me to inquire who this Cyrus was by 
whom the Lydian empire was destroyed, and 
by what means the Persians had become the 
lords paramount of Asia. And herein I shall 
follow those Persian authorities whose object 
it appears to be not to magnify the exploits of 
Cyrus, but to relate the simple truth. I know 
besides three ways in which the story of Cyrus 
is told, all differing from my own narrative. 

The Assyrians had held the Empire of Up¬ 
per Asia for the space of five hundred and 
twenty years, when the Medes set the example 
of revolt from their authority. They took arms 
for the recovery of their freedom, and fought 
a battle with the Assyrians, in which they be¬ 
haved with such gallantry as to shake off the 
yoke of servitude, and to become a free people. 
Upon their success the other nations also re¬ 
volted and regained their independence. 

96. Thus the nations over that whole extent 
of country obtained the blessing of self-gov¬ 
ernment, but they fell again under the sway of 
kings, in the manner which I will now relate. 
There was a certain Mede named Deioces, son 
of Phraortes, a man of much wisdom, who had 
conceived the desire of obtaining to himself the 
sovereign power. In furtherance of his ambi¬ 
tion, therefore, he formed and carried into ex¬ 
ecution the following scheme. As the Medes at 
that time dwelt in scattered villages without 
any central authority, and lawlessness in con¬ 
sequence prevailed throughout the land, Deio¬ 
ces, who was already a man of mark in his 
own village, applied himself with greater zeal 
and earnestness than ever before to the practice 
of justice among his fellows. It was his con¬ 
viction that justice and injustice are engaged in 
perpetual war with one another. He therefore 
began his course of conduct, and presently the 
men of his village, observing his integrity. 


chose him to be the arbiter of all their disputes. 
Bent on obtaining the sovereign power, he 
showed himself an honest and an upright 
judge, and by these means gained such credit 
with his fellow-citizens as to attract the atten¬ 
tion of those who lived in the surrounding vil¬ 
lages. They had long been suffering from un¬ 
just and oppressive judgments; so that, when 
they heard of the singular uprightness of Deio¬ 
ces, and of the equity of his decisions, they joy¬ 
fully had recourse to him in the various quar¬ 
rels and suits that arose, until at last they came 
to put confidence in no one else. 

97. The number of complaints brought be¬ 
fore him continually increasing, as people 
learnt more and more the fairness of his judg¬ 
ments, Deioces, feeling himself now all impor¬ 
tant, announced that he did not intend any 
longer to hear causes, and appeared no more 
in the seat in which he had been accustomed 
to sit and administer justice. “It did not square 
with his interests,” he said, “to spend the 
whole day in regulating other men’s affairs to 
the neglect of his own.” Hereupon robbery and 
lawlessness broke out afresh, and prevailed 
through the country even more than hereto¬ 
fore; wherefore the Medes assembled from all 
quarters, and held a consultation on the state 
of affairs. The speakers, as I think, were chiefly 
friends of Deioces. “We cannot possibly,” they 
said, “go on living in this country if things 
continue as they now are; let us therefore set a 
king over us, that so the land may be well gov¬ 
erned, and we ourselves may be able to attend 
to our own affairs, and not be forced to quit 
our country on account of anarchy.” The as¬ 
sembly was persuaded by these arguments, and 
resolved to appoint a king. 

98. It followed to determine who should be 
chosen to the office. When this debate began 
the claims of Deioces and his praises were at 
once in every mouth; so that presently all 
agreed that he should be king. Upon this he 
required a palace to be built for him suitable 
to his rank, and a guard to be given him for 
his person. The Medes complied, and built him 
a strong and large palace, on a spot which he 
himself pointed out, and likewise gave him 
liberty to choose himself a bodyguard from the 
whole nation. Thus settled upon the throne, he 
further required them to build a single great 
city, and, disregarding the petty towns in 
which they had formerly dwelt, make the new 
capital the object of their chief attention. The 
Medes were again obedient, and built the city 
now called Agbatana, the walls of which are of 


24 

great size and strength, rising in circles one 
within the other. The plan of the place is that 
each of the walls should out-top the one be¬ 
yond it by the battlements. The nature of the 
ground, which is a gentle hill, favours this ar¬ 
rangement in some degree, but it was mainly 
effected by art. The number of the circles is 
seven, the royal palace and the treasuries stand¬ 
ing within the last. The circuit of the outer 
wall is very nearly the same with that of Ath¬ 
ens. Of this wall the battlements are white, of 
the next black, of the third scarlet, of the fourth 
blue, of the fifth orange; all these are coloured 
with paint. The two last have their battlements 
coated respectively with silver and gold. 

99. All these fortifications Deioces caused to 
be raised for himself and his own palace. The 
people were required to build their dwellings 
outside the circuit of the walls. When the town 
was finished, he proceeded to arrange the cere¬ 
monial. He allowed no one to have direct ac¬ 
cess to the person of the king, but made all 
communication pass through the hands of mes¬ 
sengers, and forbade the king to be seen by his 
subjects. He also made it an offence for any one 
whatsoever to laugh or spit in the royal pres¬ 
ence. This ceremonial, of which he was the 
first inventor, Deioces established for his own 
security, fearing that his compeers, who were 
brought up together with him, and were of as 
good family as he, and no whit inferior to him 
in manly qualities, if they saw him frequently 
would be pained at the sight, and would there¬ 
fore be likely to conspire against him; whereas 
if they did not see him, they would think him 
quite a different sort of being from themselves. 

100. After completing these arrangements, 
and firmly settling himself upon the throne, 
Deioces continued to administer justice with 
the same strictness as before. Causes were stat¬ 
ed in writing, and sent in to the king, who 
passed his judgment upon the contents, and 
transmitted his decisions to the parties con¬ 
cerned: besides which he had spies and eaves¬ 
droppers in all parts of his dominions, and if he 
heard of any act of oppression, he sent for the 
guilty party, and awarded him the punishment 
meet for his offence. 

101. Thus Deioces collected the Medes into 
a nation, and ruled over them alone. Now these 
are the tribes of which they consist: the Busae, 
the Paretaceni, the Struchates, the Arizanti, the 
Budii, and the Magi. 

102. Having reigned three-and-fifty years, 
Deioces was at his death succeeded by his son 
Phraortes. This prince, not satisfied with a do¬ 


[ Book i 

minion which did not extend beyond the single 
nation of the Medes, began by attacking the 
Persians; and marching an army into their 
country, brought them under the Median yoke 
before any other people. After this success, be¬ 
ing now at the head of two nations, both of 
them powerful, he proceeded to conquer Asia, 
overrunning province after province. At last 
he engaged in war with the Assyrians—those 
Assyrians, I mean, to whom Nineveh belonged, 1 
who were formerly the lords of Asia. At pres¬ 
ent they stood alone by the revolt and desertion 
of their allies, yet still their internal condition 
was as flourishing as ever. Phraortes attacked 
them, but perished in the expedition with the j 
greater part of his army, after having reigned 
over the Medes two-and-twenty years. 

103. On the death of Phraortes his son Cy- 
axares ascended the throne. Of him it is report¬ 
ed that he was still more war-like than any of 
his ancestors, and that he was the first who 
gave organisation to an Asiatic army, dividing 
the troops into companies, and forming dis¬ 
tinct bodies of the spearmen, the archers, and 
the cavalry, who before his time had been min¬ 
gled in one mass, and confused together. He it 
was who fought against the Lydians on the oc¬ 
casion when the day was changed suddenly 
into night, and who brought under his domin¬ 
ion the whole of Asia beyond the Halys. This 
prince, collecting together all the nations 
which owned his sway, marched against Nine¬ 
veh, resolved to avenge his father, and cherish¬ 
ing a hope that he might succeed in taking the 
town. A battle was fought, in which the Assyr¬ 
ians suffered a defeat, and Cyaxares had al¬ 
ready begun the siege of the place, when a nu¬ 
merous horde of Scyths, under their king Mad- 
yes,son of Prtotohyes,burst into Asia in pursuit 
of the Cimmerians whom they had driven out 
of Europe, and entered the Median territory. 

104. The distance from the Palus Maeotis to 
the river Phasis and the Colchians is thirty 
days’ journey for a lightly-equipped traveller. 
From Colchis to cross into Media does not take 
long—there is only a single intervening nation, 
the Saspirians, passing whom you find your¬ 
self in Media. This however was not the road 
followed by the Scythians, who turned out of 
the straight course, and took the upper route, 
which is much longer, keeping the Caucasus 
upon their right. The Scythians, having thus 
invaded Media, were opposed by the Medes, t 
who gave them battle, but, being defeated, lost 
their empire. The Scythians became masters ' 
of Asia. 


HERODOTUS 




99 - 109 ] the history 25 


105. After this they marched forward with 
the design of invading Egypt. When they had 
reached Palestine, however, Psammetichus the 
Egyptian king met them with gifts and pray¬ 
ers, and prevailed on them to advance no fur¬ 
ther. On their return, passing through Asca- 
lon, a city of Syria, the greater part of them 
went their way without doing any damage; 
but some few who lagged behind pillaged the 
temple of Celestial Venus. I have inquired and 
find that the temple at Ascalon is the most an¬ 
cient of all the temples to this goddess; for the 
one in Cyprus, as the Cyprians themselves ad¬ 
mit, was built in imitation of it; and that in 
Cythera was erected by the Phoenicians, who 
belong to this part of Syria. The Scythians who 
plundered the temple were punished by the 
goddess with the female sickness, which still 
attaches to their posterity. They themselves 
confess that they are afflicted with the disease 
for this reason, and travellers who visit Scythia 
can see what sort of a disease it is. Those who 
suffer from it are called Enarees. 

106. The dominion of the Scythians over 
Asia lasted eight-and-twenty years, during 
which time their insolence and oppression 
spread ruin on every side. For besides the regu¬ 
lar tribute, they exacted from the several na¬ 
tions additional imposts, which they fixed at 
pleasure; and further, they scoured the country 
and plundered every one of whatever they 
could. At length Cyaxares and the Medes in¬ 
vited the greater part of them to a banquet, and 
made them drunk with wine, after which they 
were all massacred. The Medes then recovered 
their empire, and had the same extent of do¬ 
minion as before. They took Nineveh—I will 
relate how in another history—and conquered 
all Assyria except the district of Babylonia. Aft¬ 
er this Cyaxares died, having reigned over the 
Medes, if we include the time of the Scythian 
rule, forty years. 

107. Astyages, the son of Cyaxares, succeed¬ 
ed to the throne. He had a daughter who was 
named Mandane concerning whom he had a 
wonderful dream. He dreamt that from her 
such a stream of water flowed forth as not only 
to fill his capital, but to flood the whole of 
Asia. This vision he laid before such of the 
Magi as had the gift of interpreting dreams, 
who expounded its meaning to him in full, 
whereat he was greatly terrified. On this ac¬ 
count, when his daughter was now of ripe age, 
he would not give her in marriage to any of 
the Medes who were of suitable rank, lest the 
dream should be accomplished; but he married 


her to a Persian of good family indeed, but of 
a quiet temper, whom he looked on as much 
inferior to a Mede of even middle condition. 

108. Thus Cambyses (for so was the Persian 
called) wedded Mandane, and took her to his 
home, after which, in the very first year, Asty¬ 
ages saw another vision. He fancied that a 
vine grew from the womb of his daughter, and 
overshadowed the whole of Asia. After this 
dream, which he submitted also to the inter¬ 
preters, he sent to Persia and fetched away 
Mandane, who was now with child, and was 
not far from her time. On her arrival he set a 
watch over her, intending to destroy the child 
to which she should give birth; for the Magian 
interpreters had expounded the vision to fore¬ 
show that the offspring of his daughter would 
reign over Asia in his stead. To guard against 
this, Astyages, as soon as Cyrus was born, sent 
for Harpagus, a man of his own house and the 
most faithful of the Medes, to whom he was 
wont to entrust all his affairs, and addressed 
him thus—“Harpagus, I beseech thee neglect 
not the business with which I am about to 
charge thee; neither betray thou the interests of 
thy lord for others’ sake, lest thou bring de¬ 
struction on thine own head at some future 
time. Take the child born of Mandane my 
daughter; carry him with thee to thy home 
and slay him there. Then bury him as thou 
wilt.’’ “Oh! king,’’ replied the other, “never in 
time past did Harpagus disoblige thee in any¬ 
thing, and be sure that through all future time 
he will be careful in nothing to offend. If there¬ 
fore it be thy will that this thing be done, it is 
for me to serve thee with all diligence.” 

109. When Harpagus had thus answered, 
the child was given into his hands, clothed in 
the garb of death, and he hastened weeping to 
his home. There on his arrival he found his 
wife, to whom he told all that Astyages had 
said. “What then,” said she, “is it now in thy 
heart to do.^” “Not what Astyages requires,” 
he answered; “no, he may be madder and more 
frantic still than he is now, but I will not be 
the man to work his will, or lend a helping 
hand to such a murder as this. Many things 
forbid my slaying him. In the first place the 
boy is my own kith and kin; and next Astyages 
is oldj and has no son. If then when he dies the 
crown should go to his daughter—that daugh¬ 
ter whose child he now wishes to slay by my 
hand—what remains for me but danger of the 
fearfullest kind.^ For my own safety, indeed, 
the child must die; but some one belonging to 
Astyages must take his life, not I or mine.” 


26 HERODOTUS F Book i 


no. So saying he sent ofT a messenger to 
fetch a certain Mitradates, one of the herdsmen 
of Astyages, whose pasturages he knew to be 
the fittest for his purpose, lying as they did 
among mountains infested with wild beasts. 
This man was married to one of the king’s fe¬ 
male slaves, whose Median name was Spaco, 
which is in Greek Cyno, since in the Median 
tongue the word “Spaca” means a bitch. The 
mountains, on the skirts of which his cattle 
grazed, lie to the north of Agbatana, towards 
the Euxine. That part of Media which borders 
on the Saspirians is an elevated tract, very 
mountainous, and covered with forests, while 
the rest of the Median territory is entirely level 
ground. On the arrival of the herdsman, who 
came at the hasty summons, Harpagus said to 
him—“Astyages requires thee to take this child 
and lay him in the wildest part of the hills, 
where he will be sure to die speedily. And he 
bade me tell thee, that if thou dost not kill the 
boy, but anyhow allowest him to escape, he 
will put thee to the most painful of deaths. I 
myself am appointed to see the child exposed.” 

III. The herdsman on hearing this took the 
child in his arms, and went back the way he 
had come till he reached the folds. There, prov¬ 
identially, his wife, who had been expecting 
daily to be put to bed, had just, during the ab¬ 
sence of her husband, been delivered of a child. 
Both the herdsman and his wife were uneasy 
on each other’s account, the former fearful be¬ 
cause his wife was so near her time, the woman 
alarmed because it was a new thing for her 
husband to be sent for by Harpagus. When 
therefore he came into the house upon his re¬ 
turn, his wife, seeing him arrive so unexpected¬ 
ly, was the first to speak, and begged to know 
why Harpagus had sent for him in such a hur¬ 
ry. “Wife,” said he, “when I got to the town I 
saw and heard such things as I would to heaven 
I had never seen—such things as I would to 
heaven had never happened to our masters. 
Every one was weeping in Harpagus’s house. 
It quite frightened me, but I went in. The mo¬ 
ment I stepped inside, what should I see but a 
baby lying on the floor, panting and whimper¬ 
ing, and all covered with gold, and wrapped in 
clothes of such beautiful colours. Harpagus 
saw me, and directly ordered me to take the 
child in my arms and carry him ofi, and what 
was I to do with him, think you.^ Why, to lay 
him in the mountains, where the wild beasts 
are most plentiful. And he told me it was the 
king himself that ordered it to be done, and he 
threatened me with such dreadful things if I 


failed. So I took the child up in my arms, and 
carried him along. I thought it might be the 
son of one of the household slaves. I did won¬ 
der certainly to see the gold and the beautiful 
baby-clothes, and I could not think why there 
was such a weeping in Harpagus’s house. 
Well, very soon, as I came along, I got at the 
truth. They sent a servant with me to show me 
the way out of the town, and to leave the baby 
in my hands; and he told me that the child’s 
mother is the king’s daughter Mandane, and 
his father Cambyses, the son of Cyrus; and that 
the king orders him to be killed; and look, here 
the child is.” 

112. With this the herdsman uncovered the 
infant, and showed him to his wife, who, when 
she saw him, and observed how fine a child 
and how beautiful he was, burst into tears, and 
clinging to the knees of her husband, besought 
him on no account to expose the babe; to 
which he answered, that it was not possible for 
him to do otherwise, as Harpagus would be 
sure to send persons to see and report to him, 
and he was to sufier a most cruel death if he 
disobeyed. Failing thus in her first attempt to 
persuade her husband, the woman spoke a sec¬ 
ond time, saying, “If then there is no persuad¬ 
ing thee, and a child must needs be seen ex¬ 
posed upon the mountains, at least do thus. 
The child of which I have just been delivered 
is stillborn; take it and lay it on the hills, and 
let us bring up as our own the child of the 
daughter of Astyages. So shalt thou not be 
charged with unfaithfulness to thy lord, nor 
shall we have managed badly for ourselves. 
Our dead babe will have a royal funeral, and 
this living child will not be deprived of life.” 

113. It seemed to the herdsman that this ad¬ 
vice was the best under the circumstances. He 
therefore followed it without loss of time. The 
child which he had intended to put to death he 
gave over to his wife, and his own dead child 
he put in the cradle wherein he had carried 
the other, clothing it first in all the other’s cost¬ 
ly attire, and taking it in his arms he laid it in 
the wildest place of all the mountain-range. 
When the child had been three days exposed, 
leaving one of his helpers to watch the body, 
he started ofi for the city, and going straight to 
Harpagus’s house, declared himself ready to 
show the corpse of the boy. Harpagus sent cer¬ 
tain of his bodyguard, on whom he had the 
firmest reliance, to view the body for him, and, 
satisfied with their seeing it, gave orders for 
the funeral. Thus was the herdsman’s child 
buried, and the other child, who was after- 


I 


I 







110 - 117 ] THE HISTORY 27 


wards known by the name of Cyrus, was taken 
by the herdsman’s wife, and brought up under 
a different name. 

114. When the boy was in his tenth year, an 
accident which I will now relate, caused it to 
be discovered who he was. He was at play one 
day in the village where the folds of the cattle 
were, along with the boys of his own age, in 
the street. The other boys who were playing 
with him chose the cowherd’s son, as he was 
called, to be their king. He then proceeded to 
order them about—some he set to build him 
houses, others he made his guards, one of them 
was to be the king’s eye, another had the office 
of carrying his messages; all had some task or 
other. Among the boys there was one, the son 
of Artembares, a Mede of distinction, who re¬ 
fused to do what Cyrus had set him. Cyrus 
told the other boys to take him into custody, 
and when his orders were obeyed, he chastised 
him most severely with the whip. The son of 
Artembares, as soon as he was let go, full of 
rage at treatment so little befitting his rank, 
hastened to the city and complained bitterly to 
his father of what had been done to him by 
Cyrus. He did not, of course, say “Cyrus,” by 
which name the boy was not yet known, but 
called him the son of the king’s cowherd. Ar¬ 
tembares, in the heat of his passion, went to 
Astyages, accompanied by his son, and made 
complaint of the gross injury which had been 
done him. Pointing to the boy’s shoulders, he 
exclaimed, “Thus, oh! king, has thy slave, the 
son of a cowherd, heaped insult upon us.” 

115. At this sight and these words Astyages, 
wishing to avenge the son of Artembares for 
his father’s sake, sent for the cowherd and his 
boy. When they came together into his pres¬ 
ence, fixing his eyes on Cyrus, Astyages said, 
“Hast thou then, the son of so mean a fellow 
as that, dared to behave thus rudely to the son 
of yonder noble, one of the first in my court.?” 
“My lord,” replied the boy, “I only treated him 
as he deserved. I was chosen king in play by 
the boys of our village, because they thought 
me the best for it. He himself was one of the 
boys who chose me. All the others did accord¬ 
ing to my orders; but he refused, and made 
light of them, until at last he got his due re¬ 
ward. If for this I deserve to suffer punishment, 
here I am ready to submit to it.” 

116. While the boy was yet speaking Asty¬ 
ages was struck with a suspicion who he was. 
He thought he saw something in the character 
of his face like his own, and there was a noble¬ 
ness about the answer he had made; besides 


which his age seemed to tally with the time 
when his grandchild was exposed. Astonished 
at all this, Astyages could not speak for a while. 
At last, recovering himself with difficulty, and 
wishing to be quit of Artembares, that he 
might examine the herdsman alone, he said to 
the former, “I promise thee, Artembares, so to 
settle this business that neither thou nor thy 
son shall have any cause to complain.” Artem¬ 
bares retired from his presence, and the at¬ 
tendants, at the bidding of the king, led Cyrus 
into an inner apartment. Astyages then being 
left alone with the herdsman, inquired of him 
where he had got the boy, and who had given 
him to him; to which he made answer that the 
lad was his own child, begotten by himself, 
and that the mother who bore him was still 
alive with him in his house. Astyages re¬ 
marked that he was very ill-advised to bring 
himself into such great trouble, and at the 
same time signed to his bodyguard to lay hold 
of him. Then the herdsman, as they were drag¬ 
ging him to the rack, began at the beginning, 
and told the whole story exactly as it happened, 
without concealing anything, ending with en¬ 
treaties and prayers to the king to grant him 
forgiveness. 

117. Astyages, having got the truth of the 
matter from the herdsman, was very little fur¬ 
ther concerned about him, but with Harpagus 
he was exceedingly enraged. The guards were 
bidden to summon him into the presence, and 
on his appearance Astyages asked him, “By 
what death was it, Harpagus, that thou slewest 
the child of my daughter whom I gave into thy 
hands.?” Harpagus, seeing the cowherd in the 
room, did not betake himself to lies, lest he 
should be confuted and proved false, but re¬ 
plied as follows:—“Sire, when thou gavest the 
child into my hands I instantly considered with 
myself how I could contrive to execute thy 
wishes, and yet, while guiltless of any unfaith¬ 
fulness towards thee, avoid imbruing my 
hands in blood which was in truth thy daugh¬ 
ter’s and thine own. And this was how I con¬ 
trived it. I sent for this cowherd, and gave the 
child over to him, telling him that by the king’s 
orders it was to be put to death. And in this I 
told no lie, for thou hadst so commanded. 
Moreover, when I gave him the child, I en¬ 
joined him to lay it somewhere in the wilds of 
the mountains, and to stay near and watch till 
it was dead; and I threatened him with all 
manner of punishment if he failed. After¬ 
wards, when he had done according to all that 
I commanded him, and the child had died, I 


28 HERODOTUS [Booki 


sent some of the most trustworthy of my eu¬ 
nuchs, who viewed the body for me, and then I 
had the child buried. This, sire, is the simple 
truth, and this is the death by which the child 
died.” 

118. Thus Harpagus related the whole story 
in a plain, straightforward way; upon which 
Astyages, letting no sign escape him of the 
anger that he felt, began by repeating to him all 
that he had just heard from the cowherd, and 
then concluded with saying, “So the boy is 
alive, and it is best as it is. For the child’s fate 
was a great sorrow to me, and the reproaches 
of my daughter went to my heart. Truly for¬ 
tune has played us a good turn in this. Go thou 
home then, and send thy son to be with the 
new comer, and to-night, as I mean to sacrifice 
thank-oflerings for the child’s safety to the 
gods to whom such honour is due, I look to 
have thee a guest at the banquet.” 

119. Harpagus, on hearing this, made obeis 
ance, and went home rejoicing to find that his 
disobedience had turned out so fortunately, 
and that, instead of being punished, he was in¬ 
vited to a banquet given in honour of the hap¬ 
py occasion. The moment he reached home he 
called for his son, a youth of about thirteen, the 
only child of his parents, and bade him go to 
the palace, and do whatever Astyages should 
direct. Then, in the gladness of his heart, he 
went to his wife and told her all that had hap¬ 
pened. Astyages, meanwhile, took the son of 
Harpagus, and slew him, after which he cut 
him in pieces, and roasted some portions be¬ 
fore the fire, and boiled others; and when all 
were duly prepared, he kept them ready for 
use. The hour for the banquet came, and Har¬ 
pagus appeared, and with him the other guests, 
and all sat down to the feast. Astyages and the 
rest of the guests had joints of meat served up 
to them; but on the table of Harpagus, nothing 
was placed except the flesh of his own son. This 
was all put before him, except the hands and 
feet and head, which were laid by themselves 
in a covered basket. When Harpagus seemed 
to have eaten his fill, Astyages called out to 
him to know how he had enjoyed the repast. 
On his reply that he had enjoyed it excessively, 
they whose business it was brought him the 
basket, in which were the hands and feet and 
head of his son, and bade him open it, and take 
out what he pleased. Harpagus accordingly un¬ 
covered the basket, and saw within it the re¬ 
mains of his son. The sight, however, did not 
scare him, or rob him of his self-possession. Be¬ 
ing asked by Astyages if he knew what beast’s 


flesh it was that he had been eating, he an¬ 
swered that he knew very well, and that what¬ 
ever the king did was agreeable. After this re¬ 
ply, he took with him such morsels of the flesh 
as w'ere uneaten, and went home, intending, 
as I conceive, to collect the remains and bury 
them. 

120. Such was the mode in which Astyages 
punished Harpagus: afterwards, proceeding to 
consider what he should do with Cyrus, his 
grandchild, he sent for the Magi, who formerly • 
interpreted his dream in the way which 
alarmed him so much, and asked them how • 
they had expounded it. They answered, with¬ 
out varying from what they had said before, , ■ 
that “the boy must needs be a king if he grew 
up, and did not die too soon.” Then Astyages , 
addressed them thus: “The boy has escaped, : 
and lives; he has been brought up in the coun¬ 
try, and the lads of the village where he lives ' 
have made him their king. All that kings com- * 
monly do he has done. He has had his guards, ' , 
and his doorkeepers, and his messengers, and I j 
all the other usual officers. Tell me, then, to '| 
what, think you, does all this tend?” The Magi \ 
answered, “If the boy survives, and has ruled , 
as a king without any craft or contrivance, in ' 
that case we bid thee cheer up, and feel no i 
more alarm on his account. He will not reign |> 
a second time. For we have found even oracles |i 
sometimes fulfilled in an unimportant way; 
and dreams, still oftener, have wondrous- 1 
ly mean accomplishments.” “It is what I my¬ 
self most incline to think,” Astyages rejoined; vi 
“the boy having been already king, the dream ' 
is out, and I have nothing more to fear from, 
him. Nevertheless, take good heed and counsel ‘ 
me the best you can for the safety of my house * 
and your own interests.” “Truly,” said the 
Magi in reply, “it very much concerns our in- * 
terests that thy kingdom be firmly established; 
for if it went to this boy it would pass into for- ' 
eign hands, since he is a Persian: and then we 
Medes should lose our freedom, and be quite 
despised by the Persians, as being foreigners. 
But so long as thou, our fellow-countryman, 
art on the throne, all manner of honours are 
ours, and we are even not without some share 
in the government. Much reason therefore 
have we to forecast well for thee and for thy 
sovereignty. If then we saw any cause for pres¬ 
ent fear, be sure we would not keep it back 
from thee. But truly we are persuaded that the 
dream has had its accomplishment in this 
harmless way; and so our own fears being at 
rest, we recommend thee to banish thine. As 






118-125] THE HISTORY 29 


for the boy, our advice is that thou send him 
away to Persia, to his father and mother.” 

121. Astyages heard their answer with pleas¬ 
ure, and calling Cyrus into his presence, said 
to him, “My child, I was led to do thee a wrong 
by a dream which has come to nothing: from 
that wrong thou wert saved by thy own good 
fortune. Go now with a light heart to Persia; I 
will provide thy escort. Go, and when thou get- 
test to thy journey’s end, thou wilt behold thy 
father and thy mother, quite other people from 
Mitradates the cowherd and his wife.” 

122. With these words Astyages dismissed 
his grandchild. On his arrival at the house of 
Cambyses, he was received by his parents, who, 
when they learnt who he was, embraced him 
heartily, having always been convinced that he 
died almost as soon as he was born. So they 
asked him by what means he had chanced to 
escape; and he told them how that till lately he 
had known nothing at all about the matter, but 
had been mistaken—oh! so widely!—and how 
that he had learnt his history by the way, as he 
came from Media. He had been quite sure that 
he was the son of the king’s cowherd, but on 
the road the king’s escort had told him all the 
truth; and then he spoke of the cowherd’s wife 
who had brought him up, and filled his whole 
talk with her praises; in all that he had to tell 
them about himself, it was always Cyno— 
Cyno was everything. So it happened that his 
parents, catching the name at his mouth, and 
wishing to persuade the Persians that there 
was a special providence in his preservation, 
spread the report that Cyrus, when he was ex¬ 
posed, was suckled by a bitch. This was the 
sole origin of the rumour. 

123. Afterwards, when Cyrus grew to man¬ 
hood, and became known as the bravest and 
most popular of all his compeers, Harpagus, 
who was bent on revenging himself upon As¬ 
tyages, began to pay him court by gifts and 
messages. His own rank was too humble for 
him to hope to obtain vengeance without some 
foreign help. When therefore he saw Cyrus, 
whose wrongs were so similar to his own, 
growing up expressly (as it were) to be the 
avenger whom he needed, he set to work to 
procure his support and aid in the matter. He 
had already paved the way for his designs, by 
persuading, severally, the great Median nobles, 
whom the harsh rule of their monarch had 
offended, that the best plan would be to put 
Cyrus at their head, and dethrone Astyages. 
These preparations made, Harpagus, being 
now ready for revolt, was anxious to make 


known his wishes to Cyrus, who still lived in 
Persia; but as the roads between Media and 
Persia were guarded, he had to contrive a 
means of sending word secretly, which he did 
in the following way. He took a hare, and cut¬ 
ting open its belly without hurting the fur, he 
slipped in a letter containing what he wanted 
to say, and then carefully sewing up the 
paunch, he gave the hare to one of his most 
faithful slaves, disguising him as a hunter with 
nets, and sent him off to Persia to take the 
game as a present to Cyrus, bidding him tell 
Cyrus, by word of mouth, to paunch the ani¬ 
mal himself, and let no one be present at the 
time. 

124. All was done as he wished, and Cyrus, 
on cutting the hare open, found the letter in¬ 
side, and read as follows;—“Son of Cambyses, 
the gods assuredly watch over thee, or never 
wouldst thou have passed through thy many 
wonderful adventures—now is the time when 
thou mayst avenge thyself upon Astyages, thy 
murderer. He willed thy death, remember; to 
the gods and to me thou owest that thou art 
still alive. I think thou art‘not ignorant of what 
he did to thee, nor of what I suffered at his 
hands because I committed thee to the cow¬ 
herd, and did not put thee to death. Listen now 
to me, and obey my words, and all the empire 
of Astyages shall be thine. Raise the standard 
of revolt in Persia, and then march straight on 
Media. Whether Astyages appoint me to com¬ 
mand his forces against thee, or whether he 
appoint any other of the princes of the Medes, 
all will go as thou couldst wish. They will be 
the first to fall away from him, and joining thy 
side, exert themselves to overturn his power. 
Be sure that on our part all is ready; wherefore 
do thou thy part, and that speedily.” 

125. Cyrus, on receiving the tidings con¬ 
tained in this letter, set himself to consider how 
he might best persuade the Persians to revolt. 
After much thought, he hit on the following as 
the most expedient course: he wrote what he 
thought proper upon a roll, and then calling 
an assembly of the Persians, he unfolded the 
roll, and read out of it that Astyages appointed 
him their general. “And now,” said he, “since 
it is so, I command you to go and bring each 
man -his reaping-hook.” With these words he 
dismissed the assembly. 

Now the Persian nation is made up of many 
tribes. Those which Cyrus assembled and per¬ 
suaded to revolt from the Medes were the 
principal ones on which all the others are de¬ 
pendent. These are the Pasargadx, the Mara- 



30 HERODOTUS [Book i 


phians, and the Maspians, of whom the Pasar- 
gadre are the noblest. The Achsemenidae, from 
which spring all the Perseid kings, is one of 
their clans. The rest of the Persian tribes are 
the following: the Panthialxans, the Deru- 
sixans, the Germanians, who are engaged in 
husbandry; the Daans, the Mardians, the Drop- 
icans, and the Sagartians, who are nomads. 

126. When, in obedience to the orders which 
they had received, the Persians came with their 
reaping-hooks, Cyrus led them to a tract of 
ground, about eighteen or twenty furlongs 
each way, covered with thorns, and ordered 
them to clear it before the day was out. They 
accomplished their task; upon which he issued 
a second order to them, to take the bath the 
day following, and again come to him. Mean¬ 
while he collected together all his father's 
flocks, both sheep and goats, and all his oxen, 
and slaughtered them, and made ready to give 
an entertainment to the entire Persian army. 
Wine, too, and bread of the choicest kinds were 
prepared for the occasion. When the morrow 
came, and the Persians appeared, he bade them 
recline upon the grass, and enjoy themselves. 
After the feast was over, he requested them to 
tell him “which they liked best, to-day’s work, 
or yesterday’s.^” They answered that “the con¬ 
trast was indeed strong: yesterday brought 
them nothing but what was bad, to-day every¬ 
thing that was good.” Cyrus instantly seized 
on their reply, and laid bare his purpose in 
these words: “Ye men of Persia, thus do mat¬ 
ters stand with you. If you choose to hearken 
to my words, you may enjoy these and ten 
thousand similar delights, and never conde¬ 
scend to any slavish toil; but if you will not 
hearken, prepare yourselves for unnumbered 
toils as hard as yesterday’s. Now therefore fol¬ 
low my bidding, and be free. For myself I feel 
that I am destined by Providence to undertake 
your liberation; and you, I am sure, are no whit 
inferior to the Medes in anything, least of all 
in bravery. Revolt, therefore, from Astyages, 
without a moment’s delay.” 

127. The Persians, who had long been impa¬ 
tient of the Median dominion, now that they 
had found a leader, were delighted to shake 
off the yoke. Meanwhile Astyages, informed 
of the doings of Cyrus, sent a messenger to 
summon him to his presence. Cyrus replied, 
“Tell Astyages that I shall appear in his pres¬ 
ence sooner than he will like.” Astyages, when 
he received this message, instantly armed all 
his subjects, and, as if God had deprived him 
of his senses, appointed Harpagus to be their 


general, forgetting how greatly he had injured 
him. So when the two armies met and en¬ 
gaged, only a few of the Medes, who were not 
in the secret, fought; others deserted openly to j 
the Persians; while the greater number coun¬ 
terfeited fear, and fled. ' 

128. Astyages, on learning the shameful 
flight and dispersion of his army, broke out | 
into threats against Cyrus, saying, “Cyrus shall 1 
nevertheless have no reason to rejoice”; and di- I 
rectly he seized the Magian interpreters, who | 
had persuaded him to allow Cyrus to escape, ! 
and impaled them; after which, he armed all ' 
the Medes who had remained in the city, both , 
young and old; and leading them against the 
Persians, fought a battle, in which he was ut- ' 
terly defeated, his army being destroyed, and ' 
he himself falling into the enemy’s hands. ! 

129. Harpagus then, seeing him a prisoner, [ 
came near, and exulted over him with many 
jibes and jeers. Among other cutting speeches 
which he made, he alluded to the supper where 1 
the flesh of his son was given him to eat, and 
asked Astyages to answer him now, how he en¬ 
joyed being a slave instead of a king.^ Astyages • 
looked in his face, and asked him in return, 1 
why he claimed as his own the achievements » 
of Cyrus“Because,” said Harpagus, “it was I 
my letter which made him revolt, and so I am a 
entitled to all the credit of the enterprise.” 
Then Astyages declared that “in that case he 
was at once the silliest and the most unjust of 
men: the silliest, if when it was in his power to 
put the crown on his own head, as it must as¬ 
suredly have been, if the revolt was entirely his 
doing, he had placed it on the head of another; 
the most unjust, if on account of that supper he 
had brought slavery on the Medes. For, sup¬ 
posing that he was obliged to invest another 
with the kingly power, and not retain it him¬ 
self, yet justice required that a Mede, rather 
than a Persian, should receive the dignity. 
Now, however, the Medes, who had been no 
parties to the wrong of which he complained, 
were made slaves instead of lords, and slaves 
moreover of those who till recently had been 
their subjects.” 

130. Thus after a reign of thirty-five years, 
Astyages lost his crown, and the Medes, in con¬ 
sequence of his cruelty, were brought under 
the rule of the Persians. Their empire over the 
parts of Asia beyond the Halys had lasted one 
hundred and twenty-eight years, except dur¬ 
ing the time when the Scythians had the do¬ 
minion. Afterwards the Medes repented of 
their submission, and revolted from Darius, 






126 - 134 ] THE HISTORY 31 


but were defeated in battle, and again reduced 
to subjection. Now, however, in the time of 
Astyages, it was the Persians who under Cyrus 
revolted from the Medes, and became thence¬ 
forth the rulers of Asia. Cyrus kept Astyages 
at his court during the remainder of his life, 
without doing him any further injury. Such 
then were the circumstances of the birth and 
bringing up of Cyrus, and such were the steps 
by which he mounted the throne. It was at a 
later date that he was attacked by Crcesus, and 
overthrew him, as I have related in an earlier 
portion of this history. The overthrow of Croe¬ 
sus made him master of the whole of Asia. 

131. The customs which I know the Per¬ 
sians to observe are the following: they have 
no images of the gods, no temples nor altars, 
and consider the use of them a sign of folly. 
This comes, I think, from their not believing 
the gods to have the same nature with men, as 
the Greeks imagine. Their wont, however, is 
to ascend the summits of the loftiest moun¬ 
tains, and there to offer sacrifice to Jupiter, 
which is the name they give to the whole cir¬ 
cuit of the firmament. They likewise offer to 
the sun and moon, to the earth, to fire, to 
water, and to the winds. These are the only 
gods whose worship has come down to them 
from ancient times. At a later period they be¬ 
gan the worship of Urania, which they bor¬ 
rowed from the Arabians and Assyrians. My- 
litta is the name by which the Assyrians know 
this goddess, whom the Arabians call Alitta, 
and the Persians Mitra.^ 

132. To these gods the Persians offer sacri¬ 
fice in the following manner: they raise no 
altar, light no fire, pour no libations; there is 
no sound of the flute, no putting on of chaplets, 
no consecrated barley-cake; but the man who 
wishes to sacrifice brings his victim to a spot of 
ground which is pure from pollution, and 
there calls upon the name of the god to whom 
he intends to offer. It is usual to have the tur¬ 
ban encircled with a wreath, most commonly 
of myrtle. The sacrificer is not allowed to pray 
for blessings on himself alone, but he prays for 
the welfare of the king, and of the whole Per¬ 
sian people, among whom he is of necessity in¬ 
cluded. He cuts the victim in pieces, and hav¬ 
ing boiled the flesh, he lays it out upon the 
tenderest herbage that he can find, trefoil es¬ 
pecially. When all is ready, one of the Magi 
comes forward and chants a hymn, which they 

^ This identification is altogether a mistake. The 
Persians, like their Vedic brethren, worshipped the 
sun under the name of Mithra. 


say recounts the origin of the gods. It is not 
lawful to offer sacrifice unless there is a Magus 
present. After waiting a short time the sacri¬ 
ficer carries the flesh of the victim away with 
him, and makes whatever use of it he may 
please. 

133. Of all the days in the year, the one 
which they celebrate most is their birthday. It 
is customary to have the board furnished on 
that day with an ampler supply than common. 
The richer Persians cause an ox, a horse, a 
camel, and an ass to be baked whole and so 
served up to them: the poorer classes use in¬ 
stead the smaller kinds of cattle. They eat little 
solid food but abundance of dessert, which is 
set on table a few dishes at a time; this it is 
which makes them say that “the Greeks, when 
they eat, leave off hungry, having nothing 
worth mention served up to them after the 
meats; whereas, if they had more put before 
them, they would not stop eating.” They are 
very fond of wine, and drink it in large quan¬ 
tities. To vomit or obey natural calls in the 
presence of another is forbidden among them. 
Such are their customs in these matters. 

It is also their general practice to deliberate 
upon affairs of weight when they are drunk; 
and then on the morrow, when they are sober, 
the decision to which they came the night be¬ 
fore is put before them by the master of the 
house in which it was made; and if it is then 
approved of, they act on it; if not, they set it 
aside. Sometimes, however, they are sober at 
their first deliberation, but in this case they al¬ 
ways reconsider the matter under the influence 
of wine. 

134. When they meet each other in the 
streets, you may know if the persons meeting 
are of equal rank by the following token: if 
they are, instead of speaking, they kiss each 
other on the lips. In the case where one is a 
little inferior to the other, the kiss is given on 
the cheek; where the difference of rank is 
great, the inferior prostrates himself upon the 
ground. Of nations, they honour most their 
nearest neighbours, whom they esteem next to 
themselves; those who live beyond these they 
honour in the second degree; and so with the 
remainder, the further they are removed, the 
less the esteem in which they hold them. The 
reason is that they look upon themselves as 
very greatly superior in all respects to the rest 
of mankind, regarding others as approaching 
to excellence in proportion as they dwell near¬ 
er to them; whence it comes to pass that those 
who are the farthest off must be the most de- 


32 HERODOTUS [Book: 


graded of mankind^ Under the dominion of 
the Medes, the several nations of the empire 
exercised authority over each other in this or¬ 
der. The Medes were lords over all, and gov¬ 
erned the nations upon their borders, who in 
their turn governed the States beyond, who 
likewise bore rule over the nations which ad¬ 
joined on them.^ And this is the order which 
the Persians also follow in their distribution of 
honour; for that people, like the Medes, has a 
progressive scale of administration and govern¬ 
ment. 

135. There is no nation which so readily 
adopts foreign customs as the Persians. Thus, 
they have taken the dress of the Medes, consid¬ 
ering it superior to their own; and in war they 
wear the Egyptian breastplate. As soon as they 
hear of any luxury, they instantly make it their 
own: and hence, among other novelties, they 
have learnt unnatural lust from the Greeks. 
Each of them has several wives, and a still 
larger number of concubines. 

136. Next to prowess in arms, it is regarded 
as the greatest proof of manly excellence to be 
the father of many sons. Every year the king 
sends rich gifts to the man who can show the 
largest number: for they hold that number is 
strength. Their sons are carefully instructed 
from their fifth to their twentieth year, in three 
things alone,—to ride, to draw the bow, and to 
speak the truth. Until their fifth year they are 
not allowed to come into the sight of their 
father, but pass their lives with the women. 
This is done that, if the child die young, the 
father may not be afflicted by its loss. 

137. To my mind it is a wise rule, as also 
is the following—that the king shall not put 
any one to death for a single fault, and that 
none of the Persians shall visit a single fault in 
a slave with any extreme penalty; but in every 

^ In an early stage of geographical knowledge 
each nation regards itself as occupying the centre 
of the earth. Herodotus tacitly assumes that 
Greece is the centre. 

^ It is quite inconceivable that there should have 
been any such system of government either in 
Media or Persia, as Herodotus here indicates. With 
respect to Persia, we know that the most distant 
satrapies were held as directly of the crown as 
the nearest. The utmost that can be said with truth 
is that in the Persian and Median, as in the Ro¬ 
man empire, there were three grades; first, the rul¬ 
ing nation; secondly, the conquered provinces; 
thirdly, the nations on the frontier, governed by 
their own laws and princes, but owning the su¬ 
premacy of the imperial power, and reckoned 
among its tributaries. 


case the services of the offender shall be set 
against his misdoings; and, if the latter be 
found to outweigh the former, the aggrieved 
party shall then proceed to punishment. 

138. The Persians maintain that never yet 
did any one kill his own father or mother; but 
in all such cases they are quite sure that, if 
matters were sifted to the bottom, it would be 
found that the child was either a changeling 
or else the fruit of adultery; for it is not likely, 
they say, that the real father should perish by 
the hands of his child. 

139. They hold it unlawful to talk of any¬ 
thing which it is unlawful to do. The most dis¬ 
graceful thing in the world, they think, is to , 
tell a lie; the next worst, to owe a debt: be¬ 
cause, among other reasons, the debtor is 
obliged to tell lies. If a Persian has the leprosy I 
he is not allowed to enter into a city, or to have 1 
any dealings with the other Persians; he must, 
they say, have sinned against the sun. Foreign¬ 
ers attacked by this disorder, are forced to leave 
the country: even white pigeons are often driv¬ 
en away, as guilty of the same offence. They 
never defile a river with the secretions of their 
bodies, nor even wash their hands in one; nor I 
will they allow others to do so, as they have ! 
a great reverence for rivers. There is another 1 
peculiarity, which the Persians themselves 
have never noticed, but which has not escaped 
my observation. Their names, which are ex¬ 
pressive of some bodily or mental excellence, 

all end with the same letter—the letter which 
is called San by the Dorians, and Sigma by the '• 
lonians. Any one who examines will find that I 
the Persian names, one and all without excep- • 
tion, end with this letter.^ 

140. Thus much I can declare of the Per- ji 
sians with entire certainty, from my own actual , 
knowledge. There is another custom which is I 
spoken of with reserve, and not openly, con- • 
cerning their dead. It is said that the body of a 
male Persian is never buried, until it has been 
torn either by a dog or a bird of prey. That the ' 
Magi have this custom is beyond a doubt, for ' 
they practise it without any concealment. The 
dead bodies are covered with wax, and then 
buried in the ground. 

^ Here Herodotus was again mistaken. The Per¬ 
sian names of men which terminate with a conso¬ 
nant end indeed invariably with the letter s, or 
rather sh, as Kurush (Cyrus), Daryavush (Dari- 1 
us). But a large number of Persian names of men ‘ 
were pronounced with a vowel termination, not | 
expressed in writing, and in these the last conso¬ 
nant might be almost any letter. 





135 - 144 ] the history 33 


The Magi are a very peculiar race, different 
entirely from the Egyptian priests, and indeed 
from all other men whatsoever. The Egyptian 
priests make it a point of religion not to kill 
any live animals except those which they offer 
in sacrifice. The Magi, on the contrary, kill ani¬ 
mals of all kinds with their own hands, ex¬ 
cepting dogs and men. They even seem to take 
a delight in the employment, and kill, as read¬ 
ily as they do other animals, ants and snakes, 
and such like flying or creeping things. How¬ 
ever, since this has always been their custom, 
let them keep to it. I return to my former nar¬ 
rative. 

141. Immediately after the conquest of 
Lydia by the Persians, the Ionian and /Eolian 
Greeks sent ambassadors to Cyrus at Sardis, 
and prayed to become his lieges on the footing 
which they had occupied under Croesus. Cyrus 
listened attentively to their proposals, and an¬ 
swered them by a fable. “There was a certain 
piper,” he said, “who was walking one day by 
the seaside, when he espied some fish; so he be¬ 
gan to pipe to them, imagining they would 
come out to him upon the land. But as he 
found at last that his hope was vain, he took a 
net, and enclosing a great draught of fishes, 
drew them ashore. The fish then began to leap 
and dance; but the piper said, ‘Cease your 
dancing now, as you did not choose to come 
and dance when I piped to you.’ ” Cyrus gave 
this answer to the lonians and .T^olians, be¬ 
cause, when he urged them by his messengers 
to revolt from Croesus, they refused; but now, 
when his work was done, they came to offer 
their allegiance. It was in anger, therefore, 
that he made them this reply. The lonians, on 
hearing it, set to work to fortify their towns, 
and held meetings at the Panionium, which 
were attended by all excepting the Milesians, 
with whom Cyrus had concluded a separate 
treaty, by which he allowed them the terms 
they had formerly obtained from Croesus. The 
other lonians resolved, with one accord, to send 
ambassadors to Sparta to implore assistance. 

142. Now the lonians of Asia, who meet at 
the Panionium, have built their cities in a re¬ 
gion where the air and climate are the most 
beautiful in the whole world: for no other re¬ 
gion is equally blessed with Ionia, neither 
above it nor below it, nor east nor west of it. 
For in other countries either the climate is over 
cold and damp, or else the heat and drought 
are sorely oppressive. The lonians do not all 
speak the same language, but use in different 
places four different dialects. Towards the 


south their first city is Miletus, next to which 
lie Myus and Priene; all these three are in 
Caria and have the same dialect. Their cities 
in Lydia are the following: Ephesus, Colo¬ 
phon, Lebedus, Teos, Clazomenae, and Pho- 
caea. The inhabitants of these towns have none 
of the peculiarities of speech which belong to 
the three first-named cities, but use a dialect of 
their own. There remain three other Ionian 
towns, two situate in isles, namely, Samos and 
Chios; and one upon the mainland, which is 
Erythrae. Of these Chios and Erythrx have the 
same dialect, while Samos possesses a language 
peculiar to itself. Such are the four varieties of 
which I spoke. 

143. Of the lonians at this period, one peo¬ 
ple, the Milesians, were in no danger of attack, 
as Cyrus had received them into alliance. The 
islanders also had as yet nothing to fear, since 
Phoenicia was still independent of Persia, and 
the Persians themselves were not a seafaring 
people. The Milesians had separated from the 
common cause solely on account of the ex¬ 
treme weakness of the lonians: for, feeble as 
the power of the entire Hellenic race was at 
that time, of all its tribes the Ionic was by far 
the feeblest and least esteemed, not possessing 
a single State of any mark excepting Athens. 
The Athenians and most of the other Ionic 
States over the world, went so far in their dis¬ 
like of the name as actually to lay it aside; and 
even at the present day the greater number of 
them seem to me to be ashamed of it. But the 
twelve cities in Asia have always gloried in the 
appellation; they gave the temple which they 
built for themselves the name of the Panio¬ 
nium, and decreed that it should not be open 
to any of the other Ionic States; no State, 
however, except Smyrna, has craved admission 
to it. 

144. In the same way the Dorians of the re¬ 
gion which is now called the Pentapolis, but 
which was formerly known as the Doric Hexa- 
polis, exclude all their Dorian neighbours from 
their temple, the Triopium: nay, they have even 
gone so far as to shut out from it certain of 
their own body who were guilty of an offence 
against the customs of the place. In the games 
which were anciently celebrated in honour of 
the Triopian Apollo, the prizes given to the 
victors were tripods of brass; and the rule was 
that these tripods should not be carried away 
from the temple, but should then and there be 
dedicated to the god. Now a man of Halicar¬ 
nassus, whose name was Agasicles, being de¬ 
clared victor in the games, in open contempt of 


34 HERODOTUS [Book i 


the law, took the tripod home to his own house 
and there hung it against the wall. As a pun¬ 
ishment for this fault, the five other cities, Lin- 
dus, lalyssus, Cameirus, Cos, and Cnidus, de¬ 
prived the sixth city, Halicarnassus, of the 
right of entering the temple. 

145. The lonians founded twelve cities in 
Asia, and refused to enlarge the number, on ac¬ 
count (as I imagine) of their having been di¬ 
vided into twelve States when they lived in the 
Peloponnese; just as the Achaeans, who drove 
them out, are at the present day. The first city 
of the Achaeans after Sicyon, is Pellene, next to 
which are ^Egeira, -Egae upon the Crathis, a 
stream which is never dry, and from which the 
Italian Crathis received its name,—Bura, He- 
lice—where the lonians took refuge on their 
defeat by the Achaean invaders—Egium, Rhy- 
pes, Patreis, Phareis, Olenus on the Peirus, 
which is a large river—Dyme and Tritaeeis, 
all sea-port towns except the last two, which lie 
up the country. 

146. These are the twelve divisions of what 
is now Achaea, and was formerly Ionia; and it 
was owing to their coming from a country so 
divided that the lonians, on reaching Asia, 
founded their twelve States; for it is the height 
of folly to maintain that these lonians are more 
Ionian than the rest, or in any respect better 
born, since the truth is that no small portion of 
them were Abantians from Eubcea, who are 
not even lonians in name; and, besides, there 
were mixed up with the emigration Minyae 
from Orchomenus, Cadmeians, Dryopians, 
Phocians from the several cities of Phocis, Mo- 
lossians, Arcadian Pelasgi, Dorians from Epi- 
daurus, and many other distinct tribes. Even 
those who came from the Prytaneum of Ath¬ 
ens, and reckon themselves the purest lonians 
of all, brought no wives with them to the new 
country, but married Carian girls, whose fa¬ 
thers they had slain. Hence these women made 
a law, which they bound themselves by an oath 
to observe, and which they handed down to 
their daughters after them, “That none should 
ever sit at meat with her husband, or call him 
by his name”; because the invaders slew their 
fathers, their husbands, and their sons, and 
then forced them to become their wives. It was 
at Miletus that these events took place. 

147. The kings, too, whom they set over 
them, were either Lycians, of the blood of 
Glaucus, son of Hippolochus, or Pylian Cau- 
cons of the blood of Codrus, son of Melanthus; 
or else from both those families. But since these 
lonians set more store by the name than any of 


the others, let them pass for the pure-bred lon¬ 
ians; though truly all are lonians who have 
their origin from Athens, and keep the Apa- 
turia. This is a festival which all the lonians 
celebrate, except the Ephesians and the Colo¬ 
phonians, whom a certain act of bloodshed ex¬ 
cludes from it. 

148. The Panionium is a place in Mycale, 
facing the north, which was chosen by the 
common voice of the lonians and made sacred 
to Heliconian Neptune. Mycale itself is a pro¬ 
montory of the mainland, stretching out west¬ 
ward towards Samos, in which the lonians as¬ 
semble from all their States to keep the feast 
of the Panionia. The names of festivals, not 
only among the lonians but among all the 
Greeks, end, like the Persian proper names, in 
one and the same letter. 

149. The above-mentioned, then, are the 
twelve towns of the lonians. The Eolic cities 
are the following:—Cyme, called also Phri- 
conis, Larissa, Neonteichus, Temnus, Cilia, 
Notium, Egiroessa, Pitane, Egaeae, Myrina, 
and Gryneia. These are the eleven ancient ci- ' 
ties of the Eolians. Originally, indeed, they 
had twelve cities upon the mainland, like the 1 
lonians, but the lonians deprived them of I 
Smyrna, one of the number. The soil of Eolis 

is better than that of Ionia, but the climate is 
less agreeable. 1 

150. The following is the way in which the ' 
loss of Smyrna happened. Certain men of Col- | 
ophon had been engaged in a sedition there, | 
and being the weaker party, were driven by the 
others into banishment. The Smyrnaeans re- | 
ceived the fugitives, who, after a time, watch- , 
ing their opportunity, while the inhabitants 1 
were celebrating a feast to Bacchus outside the I 
walls, shut to the gates, and so got possession of 
the town. The Eolians of the other States came 

to their aid, and terms were agreed on between 
the parties, the lonians consenting to give up 
all the moveables, and the Eolians making a 
surrender of the place. The expelled Smyrnae- 
ans were distributed among the other States of 
the Eolians, and were everywhere admitted to 
citizenship. 

151. These, then, were all the Eolic cities 
upon the mainland, with the exception of those 
about Mount Ida, which made no part of this 
confederacy. As for the islands, Lesbos contains 
five cities. Arisba, the sixth, was taken by the 
Methymnaeans, their kinsmen, and the inhabi¬ 
tants reduced to slavery. Tenedos contains one 
city, and there is another which is built on what 
are called the Hundred Isles. The Eolians of 






145-156] THE HISTORY 35 


Lesbos and Tenedos, like the Ionian islanders, 
had at this time nothing to fear. The other .Eo- 
lians decided in their common assembly to fol¬ 
low the lonians, whatever course they should 
pursue. 

152. When the deputies of the lonians and 
/Eolians, who had journeyed with all speed to 
Sparta, reached the city, they chose one of their 
number, Pythermus, a Phoca*an, to be their 
spokesman. In order to draw together as large 
an audience as possible, he clothed himself in 
a purple garment, and so attired stood forth to 
speak. In a long discourse he besought the Spar¬ 
tans to come to the assistance of his country¬ 
men, but they were not to be persuaded, and 
voted against sending any succour. The depu¬ 
ties accordingly went their way, while the La¬ 
cedaemonians, notwithstanding the refusal 
which they had given to the prayer of the depu¬ 
tation, despatched a penteconter to the Asiatic 
coast with certain Spartans on board, for the 
purpose, as I think, of watching Cyrus and Io¬ 
nia. These men, on their arrival at Phocaea, sent 
to Sardis Lacrines, the most distinguished of 
their number, to prohibit Cyrus, in the name of 
the Lacedaemonians, from offering molestation 
to any city of Greece, since they would not al¬ 
low it. 

153. Cyrus is said, on hearing the s^^eech of 
the herald, to have asked some Greeks who 
were standing by, “Who these Lacedaemonians 
were, and what was their number, that they 
dared to send him such a notice.^” When he 
had received their reply, he turned to the Spar¬ 
tan herald and said, “I have never yet been 
afraid of any men, who have a set place in the 
middle of their city, where they come together 
to cheat each other and forswear themselves. If 
I live, the Spartans shall have troubles enough 
of their own to talk of, without concerning 
themselves about the lonians.” Cyrus intended 
these words as a reproach against all the 
Greeks, because of their having market-places 
where they buy and sell, which is a custom un¬ 
known to the Persians, who never make pur¬ 
chases in open marts, and indeed have not in 
their whole country a single market-place. 

After this interview Cyrus quitted Sardis, 
leaving the city under the charge of Tabalus, a 
Persian, but appointing Pactyas, a native, to 
collect the treasure belonging to CrcEsus and 
the other Lydians, and bring it after him. Cy¬ 
rus himself proceeded towards Agbatana, car¬ 
rying Croesus along with him, not regarding 
the lonians as important enough to be his im¬ 
mediate object. Larger designs were in his 


mind. He wished to war in person against Ba¬ 
bylon, the Bactrians, the Sacae, and Egypt; he 
therefore determined to assign to one of his 
generals the task of conquering the lonians. 

154. No sooner, however, was Cyrus gone 
from Sardis than Pactyas induced his country¬ 
men to rise in open revolt against him and his 
deputy Tabalus. With the vast treasures at his 
disposal he then went down to the sea, and em¬ 
ployed them in hiring mercenary troops, while 
at the same time he engaged the people of the 
coast to enrol themselves in his army. He then 
marched upon Sardis, where he besieged Taba¬ 
lus, who shut himself up in the citadel. 

135. When Cyrus, on his way to Agbatana, 
received these tidings, he returned to Croesus 
and said, “Where will all this end, Croesus, 
thinkest thou? It seemeth that these Lydians 
will not cease to cause trouble both to them¬ 
selves and others. I doubt me if it were not best 
to sell them all for slaves. Methinks what I 
have now done is as if a man were to ‘kill the 
father and then spare the child.’ Thou, who 
Wert something more than a father to thy 
people, I have seized and carried off, and to 
that people I have entrusted their city. Can I 
then leel surprise at their rebellion?” Thus did 
Cyrus open to Cra^sus his thoughts; whereat 
the latter, full of alarm lest Cyrus should lay 
Sardis in ruins, replied as follows: “Oh! my 
king, thy words are reasonable; but do not, I 
beseech thee, give full vent to thy anger, nor 
doom to destruction an ancient city, guiltless 
alike of the past and of the present trouble. I 
caused the one, and in my own person now pay 
the forfeit. Pactyas has caused the other, he to 
whom thou gavest Sardis in charge; let him 
bear the punishment. Grant, then, forgiveness 
to the Lydians, and to make sure of their never 
rebelling against thee, or alarming thee more, 
send and forbid them to keep any weapons of 
war, command them to wear tunics under their 
cloaks, and to put buskins upon their legs, and 
make them bring up their sons to cithern-play¬ 
ing, harping, and shop-keeping. So wilt thou 
soon see them become women instead of men, 
and there will be no more fear of their revolt¬ 
ing from thee.” 

156. Croesus thought the Lydians would 
even so be better off than if they were sold for 
slaves, and therefore gave the above advice to 
Cyrus, knowing that, unless he brought for¬ 
ward some notable suggestion, he would not 
be able to persuade him to alter his mind. He 
was likewise afraid lest, alter escaping the dan¬ 
ger which now pressed, the Lydians at some fu- 





36 HERODOTUS [Booki 


ture time might revolt from the Persians and 
so bring themselves to ruin. The advice pleased 
Cyrus, who consented to forego his anger and 
do as Crcesus had said. Thereupon he sum¬ 
moned to his presence a certain Mede, Mazares 
by name, and charged him to issue orders to 
the Lydians in accordance with the terms of 
Croesus’ discourse. Further, he commanded 
him to sell for slaves all who had joined the 
Lydians in their attack upon Sardis, and above 
aught else to be sure that he brought Pactyas 
with him alive on his return. Having given 
these orders Cyrus continued his journey to¬ 
wards the Persian territory. 

157. Pactyas, when news came of the near 
approach of the army sent against him, fled in 
terror to Cyme. Mazares, therefore, the Median 
general, who had marched on Sardis with a de¬ 
tachment of the army of Cyrus, finding on his 
arrival that Pactyas and his troops were gone, 
immediately entered the town. And first of all 
he forced the Lydians to obey the orders of his 
master, and change (as they did from that 
time) their entire manner of living. Next, he 
despatched messengers to Cyme, and required 
to have Pactyas delivered up to him. On this 
the Cymseans resolved to send to Branchidae 
and ask the advice of the god. Branchidae is 
situated in the territory of Miletus, above the 
port of Panormus. There was an oracle there, 
established in very ancient times, which both 
the lonians and iEolians were wont often to 
consult. 

158. Hither therefore the Cymaeans sent 
their deputies to make inquiry at the shrine, 
“What the gods would like them to do with 
the Lydian, Pactyas.^” The oracle told them, in 
reply, to give him up to the Persians. With this 
answer the messengers returned, and the peo¬ 
ple of Cyme were ready to surrender him ac¬ 
cordingly; but as they were preparing to do so, 
Aristodicus, son of Heraclides, a citizen of dis¬ 
tinction, hindered them. He declared that he 
distrusted the response, and believed that the 
messengers had reported it falsely; until at last 
another embassy, of which Aristodicus himself 
made part, was despatched, to repeat the for¬ 
mer inquiry concerning Pactyas. 

159. On their arrival at the shrine of the 
god, Aristodicus, speaking on behalf of the 
whole body, thus addressed the oracle: “Oh! 
king, Pactyas the Lydian, threatened by the 
Persians with a violent death, has come to us 
for sanctuary, and lo, they ask him at our 
hands, calling upon our nation to deliver him 
up. Now, though we greatly dread the Persian 


power, yet have we not been bold to give up | 
our suppliant, till we have certain knowledge 1 j 
of thy mind, what thou wouldst have us to do.” | 
The oracle thus questioned gave the same an¬ 
swer as before, bidding them surrender Pactyas 1 
to the Persians; whereupon Aristodicus, who , 
had come prepared for such an answer, pro- ^ 
ceeded to make the circuit of the temple, and ! 
to take all the nests of young sparrows and | 
other birds that he could find about the build- i 
ing. As he was thus employed, a voice, it is | 
said, came forth from the inner sanctuary, ad- . 
dressing Aristodicus in these words: “Most im¬ 
pious of men, what is this thou hast the face to I 
do.^ Dost thou tear my suppliants from miy | 
temple.^” Aristodicus, at no loss for a reply, re- 1 
joined, “Oh, king, art thou so ready to protect 1 
thy suppliants, and dost thou command the 1 
Cymaeans to give up a suppliant.^” “Yes,” re- ' 
turned the god, “I do command it, that so for j 
the impiety you may the sooner perish, and , 
not come here again to consult my oracle about 
the surrender of suppliants.” 

160. On the receipt of this answer the Cy¬ 
maeans, unwilling to bring the threatened de¬ 
struction on themselves by giving up the man, 
and afraid of having to endure a siege if they 
continued to harbour him, sent Pactyas away 
to Mytilene. On this Mazares despatched en- i 
voys to the Mytilenaeans to demand the fugitive ' 
of them, and they were preparing to give him [ 
up for a reward (I cannot say with certainty 
how large, as the bargain was not completed), | 
when the Cymxans, hearing what the Myti- s 
lenaeans were about, sent a vessel to Lesbos, and | 
conveyed away Pactyas to Chios. From hence M 
it was that he was surrendered. The Chians 
dragged him from the temple of Minerva Po- 
liuchus and gave him up to the Persians, on 
condition of receiving the district of Atarneus, 

a tract of Mysia opposite to Lesbos, as the price 
of the surrender. Thus did Pactyas fall into the 
hands of his pursuers, who kept a strict watch 
upon him that they might be able to produce 
him before Cyrus. For a long time afterwards 
none of the Chians would use the barley of 
Atarneus to place on the heads of victims, or 
make sacrificial cakes of the corn grown there, 
but the whole produce of the land was exclud¬ 
ed from all their temples. 

161. Meanwhile Mazares, after he had re¬ 
covered Pactyas from the Chians, made war 
upon those who had taken part in the attack j 
on Tabalus, and in the first place took Priene I 
and sold the inhabitants for slaves, after which I 
he overran the whole plain of the Maeander and I 








157-166] 

the district of Magnesia, both of which he gave 
up for pillage to the soldiery. He then suddenly 
sickened and died. 

162. Upon his death Harpagus was sent 
down to the coast to succeed to his command. 
He also was of the race of the Medes, being the 
man whom the Median king, Astyages, feasted 
at the unholy banquet, and who lent his aid to 
place Cyrus upon the throne. Appointed by Cy¬ 
rus to conduct the war in these parts, he en¬ 
tered Ionia, and took the cities by means of 
mounds. Forcing the enemy to shut themselves 
up within their defences, he heaped mounds of 
earth against their walls, and thus carried the 
towns. Phocaea was the city against which he 
directed his first attack. 

163. Now the Phocaeans were the first of the 
Greeks who performed long voyages, and it 
was they who made the Greeks acquainted 
with the Adriatic and with Tyrrhenia, with 
Iberia, and the city of Tartessus. The vessel 
which they used in their voyages was not the 
round-built merchant-ship, but the long pente- 
conter. On their arrival at Tartessus, the king 
of the country, whose name was Arganthonius, 
took a liking to them. This monarch reigned 
over the Tartessians for eighty years, and lived 
to be a hundred and twenty years old. He re¬ 
garded the Phocseans with so much favour as, 
at first, to beg them to quit Ionia and settle in 
whatever part of his country they liked. After¬ 
wards, finding that he could not prevail upon 
them to agree to this, and hearing that the 
Mede was growing great in their neighbour¬ 
hood, he gave them money to build a wall 
about their town, and certainly he must have 
given it with a bountiful hand, for the town is 
many furlongs in circuit, and the wall is built 
entirely of great blocks of stone skilfully fitted 
together. The wall, then, was built by his aid. 

164. Harpagus, having advanced against 
the Phocaeans with his army, laid siege to their 
city, first, however, offering them terms. “It 
would content him,” he said, “if the Phocae- 
ans would agree to throw down one of their 
battlements, and dedicate one dwelling-house 
to the king.” The Phocaeans, sorely vexed at 
the thought of becoming slaves, asked a single 
day to deliberate on the answer they should re¬ 
turn, and besought Harpagus during that day 
to draw off his forces from the walls. Harpagus 
replied, “that he understood well enough what 
they were about to do, but nevertheless he 
would grant their request.” Accordingly the 
troops were withdrawn, and the Phocaeans 
forthwith took advantage of their absence to 


37 

launch their penteconters, and put on board 
their wives and children, their household 
goods, and even the images of their gods, with 
all the votive offerings from the fanes, except 
the paintings and the works in stone or brass, 
which were left behind. With the rest they em¬ 
barked, and putting to sea, set sail for Chios. 
The Persians, on their return, took possession 
of an empty town. 

165. Arrived at Chios, the Phocaeans made 
offers for the purchase of the islands called the 
QEnussae, but the Chians refused to part with 
them, fearing lest the Phocaeans should estab¬ 
lish a factory there, and exclude their mer¬ 
chants from the commerce of those seas. On 
their refusal, the Phocaeans, as Arganthonius 
was now dead, made up their minds to sail to 
Cyrnus (Corsica), where, twenty years before, 
following the direction of an oracle, they had 
founded a city, which was called Alalia. Before 
they set out, however, on this voyage, they 
sailed once more to Phocaea, and surprising the 
Persian troops appointed by Harpagus to gar¬ 
rison the town, put them all to the sword. After 
this they laid the heaviest curses on the man 
who should draw back and forsake the arma¬ 
ment; and having dropped a heavy mass of 
iron into the sea, swore never to return to Pho¬ 
caea till that mass reappeared upon the surface. 
Nevertheless, as they were preparing to depart 
for Cyrnus, more than half of their number 
were seized with such sadness and so great a 
longing to see once more their city and their 
ancient homes, that they broke the oath by 
which they had bound themselves and sailed 
back to Phocaea. 

166. The rest of the Phocaeans, who kept 
their oath, proceeded without stopping upon 
their voyage, and when they came to Cyrnus 
established themselves along with the earlier 
settlers at Alalia and built temples in the place. 
For five years they annoyed their neighbours 
by plundering and pillaging on all sides, until 
at length the Carthaginians and Tyrrhenians 
leagued against them, and sent each a fleet of 
sixty ships to attack the town. The Phocaeans, 
on their part, manned all their vessels, sixty in 
number, and met their enemy on the Sardinian 
sea. In the engagement which followed the 
Phocaeans were victorious, but their success 
was only a sort of Cadmeian victory.^ They 
lost forty ships in the battle, and the twenty 
which remained came out of the engagement 
with beaks so bent and blunted as to be no 

^ A Cadmeian victory was one from which the 
victor received more hurt than profit. 


THE HISTORY 


38 HERODOTUS [ Book i 


longer serviceable. The Phocaeans therefore 
sailed back again to Alalia, and taking their 
wives and children on board, with such por¬ 
tion of their goods and chattels as the vessels 
could bear, bade adieu to Cyrnus and sailed to 
Rhegium. 

167. The Carthaginians and Tyrrhenians, 
who had got into their hands many more than 
the Phocicans from among the crews of the 
forty vessels that were destroyed, landed their 
captives upon the coast after the fight, and 
stoned them all to death. Afterwards, when 
sheep, or oxen, or even men of the district of 
Agylla passed by the spot where the murdered 
Phocaeans lay, their bodies became distorted, or 
they were seized with palsy, or they lost the 
use of some of their limbs. On this the people 
of Agylla sent to Delphi to ask the oracle how 
they might expiate their sin. The answer of the 
Pythoness required them to institute the cus¬ 
tom, which they still observe, of honouring the 
dead Phocaeans with magnificent funeral rites, 
and solemn games, both gymnic and equestri¬ 
an. Such, then, was the fate that befell the Pho- 
caean prisoners. The other Phocaeans, who had 
fled to Rhegium, became after a while the 
founders of the city called Vela, in the district 
of CEnotria. This city they colonised, upon the 
showing of a man of Posidonia, who suggested 
that the oracle had not meant to bid them set 
up a town in Cyrnus the island, but set up the 
worship of Cyrnus the hero. 

168. Thus fared it with the men of the city 
of Phoca'a in Ionia. They of Teos did and suf¬ 
fered almost the same; for they too, when Har- 
pagus had raised his mound to the height of 
their defences, took ship, one and all, and sail¬ 
ing across the sea to Thrace, founded there the 
city of Abdera. The site was one which Ti- 
mesius of Clazomenae had previously tried to 
colonise, but without any lasting success, for he 
was expelled by the Thracians. Still the Teians 
of Abdera worship him to this day as a hero. 

169. Of all the lonians these two states alone, 
rather than submit to slavery, forsook their 
fatherland. The others (I except Miletus) re¬ 
sisted Harpagus no less bravely than those who 
fled their country, and performed many feats 
of arms, each fighting in their own defence, 
but one after another they suffered defeat; the 
cities were taken, and the inhabitants submit¬ 
ted, remaining in their respective countries, 
and obeying the behests of their new lords. Mi¬ 
letus, as I have already mentioned, had made 
terms with Cyrus, and so continued at peace. 
Thus was continental Ionia once more reduced 


to servitude; and when the lonians of the is¬ 
lands saw their brethren upon the mainland 
subjugated, they also, dreading the like, gave 
themselves up to Cyrus. 

170. It was while the lonians were in this 
distress, but still, amid it all, held their meet¬ 
ings, as of old, at the Panionium, that Bias of 
Priene, who was present at the festival, recom¬ 
mended (as I am informed) a project of the 
very highest wisdom, which would, had it been 
embraced, have enabled the lonians to become 
the happiest and most flourishing of the 
Greeks. He exhorted them “to join in one body, 
set sail for Sardinia, and there found a single 
Pan-Ionic city; so they would escape from slav¬ 
ery and rise to great fortune, being masters of 
the largest island in the world, exercising do¬ 
minion even beyond its bounds; whereas if 
they stayed in Ionia, he saw no prospect of their 
ever recovering their lost freedom.” Such was 
the counsel which Bias gave the lonians in 
their affliction. Before their misfortunes began, 
Thales, a man of Miletus, of Phoenician de¬ 
scent, had recommended a different plan. He 
counselled them to establish a single seat of 
government, and pointed out Teos as the fittest 
place for it; “for that,” he said, “was the centre 
of Ionia. Their other cities might still continue 
to enjoy their own laws, just as if they were in¬ 
dependent states.” This also was good advice. 

171. After conquering the lonians, Harpa¬ 
gus proceeded to attack the Carians, the Cau- 
nians, and the Lycians. The lonians and iEoli- 
ans were forced to serve in his army. Now, of 
the above nations the Carians are a race who 
came into the mainland from the islands. In 
ancient times they were subjects of king Minos, 
and went by the name of Leleges, dwelling 
among the isles, and, so far as I have been able 
to push my inquiries, never liable to give trib¬ 
ute to any man. They served on board the ships 
of king Minos whenever he required; and thus, 
as he was a great conqueror and prospered in 
his wars, the Carians were in his day the most 
famous by far of all the nations of the earth. 
They likewise were the inventors of three 
things, the use of which was borrowed from 
them by the Greeks; they were the first to fas¬ 
ten crests on helmets and to put devices on 
shields, and they also invented handles for 
shields. In the earlier times shields were with¬ 
out handles, and their wearers managed them 
by the aid of a leathern thong, by which they 
were slung round the neck and left shoulder. 
Long after the time of Minos, the Carians were 
driven from the islands by the lonians and 




167-175] 

Dorians, and so setded upon the mainland. 
The above is the account which the Cretans 
give of the Carians: the Carians themselves say 
very differently. They maintain that they are 
the aboriginal inhabitants of the part of the 
mainland where they now dwell, and never 
had any other name than that which they still 
bear; and in proof of this they show an ancient 
temple of Carian Jove in the country of the 
Mylasians, in which the Mysians and Lydians 
have the right of worshipping, as brother races 
to the Carians: for Lydus and Mysus, they say, 
were brothers of Car. These nations, therefore, 
have the aforesaid right; but such as are of a 
different race, even though they have come to 
use the Carian tongue, are excluded from this 
temple. 

172. The Caunians, in my judgment, are ab¬ 
originals; but by their own account they came 
from Crete. In their language, either they have 
approximated to the Carians, or the Carians to 
them—on this point I cannot speak with cer¬ 
tainty. In their customs, however, they differ 
greatly from the Carians, and not only so, but 
from all other men. They think it a most hon¬ 
ourable practice for friends or persons of the 
same age, whether they be men, women, or 
children, to meet together in large companies, 
for the purpose of drinking wine. Again, on 
one occasion they determined that they would 
no longer make use of the foreign temples 
which had been long established among them, 
but would worship their own old ancestral 
gods alone. Then their whole youth took arms, 
and striking the air with their spears, marched 
to the Calyndic frontier, declaring that they 
were driving out the foreign gods. 

173. The Lycians are in good truth anciently 
from Crete; which island, in former days, was 
wholly peopled with barbarians. A quarrel 
arising there between the two sons of Europa, 
Sarpedon and Minos, as to which of them 
should be king, Minos, whose party prevailed, 
drove Sarpedon and his followers into banish¬ 
ment. The exiles sailed to Asia, and landed on 
the Milyan territory. Milyas was the ancient 
name of the country now inhabited by the Ly¬ 
cians: the Milyae of the present day were, in 
those times, called Solymi. So long as Sarpedon 
reigned, his followers kept the name which 
they brought with them from Crete, and were 
called Termilae, as the Lycians still are by those 
who live in their neighbourhood. But after Ly- 
cus, the son of Pandion, banished from Athens 
by his brother ALgeus, had found a refuge with 
Sarpedon in the country of these Termilae, they 


39 

came, in course of time, to be called from him 
Lycians. Their customs are partly Cretan, part¬ 
ly Carian. They have, however, one singular 
custom in which they differ from every other 
nation in the world. They take the mother’s 
and not the father’s name. Ask a Lycian who 
he is, and he answers by giving his own name, 
that of his mother, and so on in the female line. 
Moreover, if a free woman marry a man who 
is a slave, their children are full citizens; but if 
a free man marry a foreign woman, or live 
with a concubine, even though he be the first 
person in the State, the children forfeit all the 
rights of citizenship. 

174. Of these nations, the Carians submitted 
to Harpagus without performing any brilliant 
exploits. Nor did the Greeks who dwelt in 
Caria behave with any greater gallantry. 
Among them were the Cnidians, colonists from 
Lacedamon, who occupy a district facing the 
sea, which is called Triopium. This region ad¬ 
joins upon the Bybassian Chersonese; and, ex¬ 
cept a very small space, is surrounded by the 
sea, being bounded on the north by the Cera¬ 
mic Gulf, and on the south by the channel to¬ 
wards the islands of Syme and Rhodes. While 
Harpagus was engaged in the conquest of Io¬ 
nia, the Cnidians, wishing to make their coun¬ 
try an island, attempted to cut through this nar¬ 
row neck of land, which was no more than five 
furlongs across from sea to sea. Their whole ter¬ 
ritory lay inside the isthmus; for where Cnidia 
ends towards the mainland, the isthmus begins 
which they were now seeking to cut through. 
The work had been commenced, and many 
hands were employed upon it, when it was ob¬ 
served that there seemed to be something un¬ 
usual and unnatural in the number of wounds 
that the workmen received, especially about 
their eyes, from the splintering of the rock. The 
Cnidians, therefore, sent to Delphi, to inquire 
what it was that hindered their efforts; and re¬ 
ceived, according to their own account, the fol¬ 
lowing answer from the oracle:— 

Fence not the isthmus off, nor dig it through — 
]ove would have made an island, had he wished. 

So the Cnidians ceased digging, and when 
Harpagus advanced with his army, they gave 
themselves up to him without striking a blow. 

175. Above Halicarnassus, and further from 
the coast, were the Pedasians. With this people, 
when any evil is about to befall either them¬ 
selves or their neighbours, the priestess of Mi¬ 
nerva grows an ample beard. Three times has 
this marvel happened. They alone, of all the 


THE HISTORY 




40 HERODOTUS TBooki 


dwellers in Caria, resisted Harpagus for a 
while, and gave him much trouble, maintain¬ 
ing themselves in a certain mountain called 
Lida, which they had fortified; but in course of 
time they also vv^ere forced to submit. 

176. When Harpagus, after these successes, 
led his forces into the Xanthian plain, the Ly- 
cians of Xanthus went out to meet him in the 
field: though but a small band against a numer¬ 
ous host, they engaged in battle, and performed 
many glorious exploits. Overpowered at last, 
and forced within their walls, they collected 
into the citadel their wives and children, all 
their treasures, and their slaves; and having so 
done, fired the building, and burnt it to the 
ground. After this, they bound themselves to¬ 
gether by dreadful oaths, and sallying forth 
against the enemy, died sword in hand, not 
one escaping. Those Lycians who now claim to 
be Xanthians, are foreign immigrants, except 
eighty families, who happened to be absent 
from the country, and so survived the others. 
Thus was Xanthus taken by Harpagus, and 
Caunus fell in like manner into his hands; for 
the Caunians in the main followed the exam¬ 
ple of the Lycians. 

177. While the lower parts of Asia were in 
this way brought under by Harpagus, Cyrus in 
person subjected the upper regions, conquering 
every nation, and not suffering one to escape. 
Of these conquests I shall pass by the greater 
portion, and give an account of those only 
which gave him the most trouble, and are the 
worthiest of mention. When he had brought all 
the rest of the continent under his sway, he 
made war on the Assyrians. 

178. Assyria possesses a vast number of great 
cities, whereof the most renowned and strong¬ 
est at this time was Babylon, whither, after the 
fall of Nineveh, the seat of government had 
been removed. The following is a description 
of the place:— The city stands on a broad 
plain, and is an exact square, a hundred and 
twenty furlongs in length each way, so that the 
entire circuit is four hundred and eighty fur¬ 
longs. While such is its size, in magnificence 
there is no other city that approaches to it. It is 
surrounded, in the first place, by a broad and 
deep moat, full of water, behind which rises a 
wall fifty royal cubits in width, and two hun¬ 
dred in height. (The royal cubit is longer by 
three fingers’ breadth than the common cubit.) 

179. And here I may not omit to tell the use 
to which the mould dug out of the great moat 
was turned, nor the manner wherein the wall 
was wrought. As fast as they dug the moat the 


soil which they got from the cutting was made 
into bricks, and when a sufficient number were 
completed they baked the bricks in kilns. Then 
they set to building, and began with bricking 
the borders of the moat, after which they pro¬ 
ceeded to construct the wall itself, using 
throughout for their cement hot bitumen, and 
interposing a layer of wattled reeds at every 
thirtieth course of the bricks. On the top, along 
the edges of the wall, they constructed build¬ 
ings of a single chamber facing one another, 
leaving between them room for a four-horse 
chariot to turn. In the circuit of the wall are a 
hundred gates, all of brass, with brazen lintels 
and side-posts. The bitumen used in the work 
was brought to Babylon from the Is, a small 
stream which flows into the Euphrates at the 
point where the city of the same name stands, 
eight days’ journey from Babylon. Lumps of 
bitumen are found in great abundance in this 
river. 

180. The city is divided into two portions by 
the river which runs through the midst of it. 
This river is the Euphrates, a broad, deep, 
swift stream, which rises in Armenia, and emp¬ 
ties itself into the Erythraean sea. The city wall 
is brought down on both sides to the edge of 
the stream: thence, from the corners of the 
wall, there is carried along each bank of the 
river a fence of burnt bricks. The houses are 
mostly three and four stories high; the streets 
all run in straight lines, not only those parallel 
to the river, but also the cross streets which 
lead down to the water-side. At the river end 
of these cross streets are low gates in the fence 
that skirts the stream, which are, like the great 
gates in the outer wall, of brass, and open on 
the water. 

181. The outer wall is the main defence of 
the city. There is, however, a second inner 
wall, of less thickness than the first, but very 
little inferior to it in strength. The centre of 
each division of the town was occupied by a 
fortress. In the one stood the palace of the 
kings, surrounded by a wall of great strength 
and size: in the other was the sacred precinct 
of Jupiter Belus, a square enclosure two fur¬ 
longs each way, with gates of solid brass; 
which was also remaining in my time. In the 
middle of the precinct there was a tower of 
solid masonry, a furlong in length and breadth, 
upon which was raised a second tower, and on 
that a third, and so on up to eight. The ascent 
to the top is on the outside, by a path which 
winds round all the towers. When one is about 
half-way up, one finds a resting-place and seats. 



176-185] THE HISTORY 41 


where persons are wont to sit some time on 
their way to the summit. On the topmost tower 
there is a spacious temple, and inside the tem¬ 
ple stands a couch of unusual size, richly 
adorned, with a golden table by its side. There 
is no statue of any kind set up in the place, nor 
is the chamber occupied of nights by any one 
but a single native woman, who, as the Chal- 
dacans, the priests of this god, affirm, is chosen 
for himself by the deity out of all the women 
of the land. 

182. They also declare—but I for my part do 
not credit it—that the god comes down in per¬ 
son into this chamber, and sleeps upon the 
couch. This is like the story told by the Egyp¬ 
tians of what takes place in their city of Thebes, 
where a woman always passes the night in 
the temple of the Theban Jupiter.^ In each case 
the woman is said to be debarred all inter¬ 
course with men. It is also like the custom of 
Patara, in Lycia, where the priestess who de¬ 
livers the oracles, during the time that she is 
so employed—for at Patara there is not always 
an oracle—is shut up in the temple every night. 

183. Below, in the same precinct, there is a 
second temple, in which is a sitting figure of 
Jupiter, all of gold. Before the figure stands a 
large golden table, and the throne whereon it 
sits, and the base on which the throne is placed, 
are likewise of gold. The Chaldaeans told me 
that all the gold together was eight hundred 
talents’ weight. Outside the temple are two al¬ 
tars, one of solid gold, on which it is only law¬ 
ful to oTer sucklings; the other a common al¬ 
tar, but of great size, on which the full-grown 
animals are sacrificed. It is also on the great al¬ 
tar that the Chaldaeans burn the frankincense, 
which is of?ered to the amount of a thousand 
talents’ weight, every year, at the festival of the 
God. In the time of Cyrus there was likewise in 
this temple a figure of a man, twelve cubits 
high, entirely of solid gold. I myself did not see 
this figure, but I relate what the Chaldaeans re¬ 
port concerning it. Darius, the son of Hystas- 
pes, plotted to carry the statue off, but had not 
the hardihood to lay his hands upon it. Xerxes, 
however, the son of Darius, killed the priest 
who forbade him to move the statue, and took 
it away. Besides the ornaments which I have 
mentioned, there are a large number of private 
offerings in this holy precinct. 

184. Many sovereigns have ruled over this 
city of Babylon, and lent their aid to the build- 

^ The Theban Jupiter, or god worshipped as the 
Supreme Being in the city of Thebes, was Ammon 
(Amun). 


ing of its walls and the adornment of its tem¬ 
ples, of whom I shall make mention in my As¬ 
syrian history. Among them two were women. 
Of these, the earlier, called Semiramis, held the 
throne five generations before the later prin¬ 
cess. She raised certain embankments well 
worthy of inspection, in the plain near Baby¬ 
lon, to control the river, which, till then, used 
to overflow, and flood the whole country round 
about. 

185. The later of the two queens, whose 
name was Nitocris, a wiser princess than her 
predecessor, not only left behind her, as mem¬ 
orials of her occupancy of the throne, the 
works which I shall presently describe, but also, 
observing the great power and restless enter¬ 
prise of the Medes, who had taken so large a 
number of cities, and among them Nineveh, 
and expecting to be attacked in her turn, made 
all possible exertions to increase the defences 
of her empire. And first, whereas the river Eu¬ 
phrates, which traverses the city, ran formerly 
with a straight course to Babylon, she, by cer¬ 
tain excavations which she made at some dis¬ 
tance up the stream, rendered it so winding 
that it comes three several times in sight of the 
same village, a village in Assyria, which is 
called Ardericca; and to this day, they who 
would go from our sea to Babylon, on descend¬ 
ing to the river touch three times, and on three 
different days, at this very place. She also made 
an embankment along each side of the Eu¬ 
phrates, wonderful both for breadth and 
height, and dug a basin for a lake a great way 
above Babylon, close alongside of the stream, 
which was sunk everywhere to the point where 
they came to water, and was of such breadth 
that the whole circuit measured four hundred 
and twenty furlongs. The soil dug out of this 
basin was made use of in the embankments 
along the waterside. When the excavation was 
finished, she had stones brought, and bordered 
with them the entire margin of the reservoir. 
These two things were done, the river made to 
wind, and the lake excavated, that the stream 
might be slacker by reason of the number of 
curves, and the voyage be rendered circuitous, 
and that at the end of the voyage it might be 
necessary to skirt the lake and so make a long 
round. All these works were on that side of 
Babylon where the passes lay, and the roads 
into Media were the straightest, and the aim of 
the queen in making them was to prevent the 
Medes from holding intercourse with the Bab¬ 
ylonians, and so to keep them in ignorance of 
her affairs. 



42 HERODOTUS TBooki 


186. While the soil from the excavation was 
being thus used for the defence of the city, Ni- 
tocris engaged also in another undertaking, a 
mere hy-vvork compared with those we have 
already mentioned. The city, as I said, was di¬ 
vided by the river into two distinct portions. 
Under the former kings, if a man wanted to 
pass from one of these divisions to the other, 
he had to cross in a boat; which must, it seems 
to me, have been very troublesome. According¬ 
ly, while she was digging the lake, Nitocris be¬ 
thought herself of turning it to a use which 
should at once remove this inconvenience, and 
enable her to leave another monument of her 
reign over Babylon. She gave orders for the 
hewing of immense blocks of stone, and when 
they were ready and the basin was excavated, 
she turned the entire stream of the Euphrates 
into the cutting, and thus for a time, while the 
basin was filling, the natural channel of the riv¬ 
er was left dry. Forthwith she set to work, and 
in the first place lined the banks of the stream 
within the city with quays of burnt brick, and 
also bricked the fanding-places opposite the 
river-gates, adopting throughout the same 
fashion of brickwork which had been used in 
the town wall; after which, with the materials 
which had been prepared, she built, as near the 
middle of the town as possible, a stone bridge, 
the blocks whereof were bound together with 
iron and lead. In the daytime square wooden 
platforms were laid along from pier to pier, on 
which the inhabitants crossed the stream; but 
at night they were withdrawn, to prevent peo¬ 
ple passing from side to side in the dark to com¬ 
mit robberies. When the river had filled the 
cutting, and the bridge was finished, the Eu¬ 
phrates was turned back again into its ancient 
bed; and thus the basin, transformed suddenly 
into a lake, was seen to answer the purpose for 
which it was made, and the inhabitants, by 
help of the basin, obtained the advantage of a 
bridge. 

187. It was this same princess by whom a re¬ 
markable deception was planned. She had her 
tomb constructed in the upper part of one of 
the principal gateways of the city, high above 
the heads of the passers by, with this inscrip¬ 
tion cut upon it:—“If there be one among my 
successors on the throne of Babylon who is in 
want of treasure, let him open my tomb, and 
take as much as he chooses—not, however, un¬ 
less he be truly in want, for it will not be for 
his good.” This tomb continued untouched un¬ 
til Darius came to the kingdom. To him it 
seemed a monstrous thing that he should be un¬ 


able to use one of the gates of the town, and ' 
that a sum of money should be lying idle, and 
moreover inviting his grasp, and he not seize 
upon it. Now he could not use the gate, be- 
cause, as he drove through, the dead body , 
would have been over his head. Accordingly he 
opened the tomb; but instead of money, found 
only the dead body, and a writing which said— 1 
“Hadst thou not been insatiate of pelf, and 
careless how thou gottest it, thou wouldst not 1 
have broken open the sepulchres of the dead.” 

188. The expedition of Cyrus was under¬ 
taken against the son of this princess, who bore 
the same name as his father Labynetus, and ' 
was king of the Assyrians. The Great King, j 
when he goes to the wars, is always supplied 
with provisions carefully prepared at home, 
and with cattle of his own. Water too from the • 
river Choaspes, which flows by Susa, is taken 1 
with him for his drink, as that is the only 1 
water which the kings of Persia taste. Wher- I 
ever he travels, he is attended by a number of I 
four-wheeled cars drawn by mules, in which ' 
the Choaspes water, ready boiled for use, and ' 
stored in flagons of silver, is moved with him , 
from place to place. 

189. Cyrus on his way to Babylon came to 
the banks of the Gyndes, a stream which, ris- , 
ing in the Matienian mountains, runs through 
the country of the Dardanians, and empties it- 1 
self into the river Tigris. The Tigris, after re- I 
ceiving the Gyndes, flows on by the city of j 
Opis, and discharges its waters into the Ery- i 
thriean sea. When Cyrus reached this stream, ' 1 
which could only he passed in boats, one of the |' 
sacred white horses accompanying his march, j 
full of spirit and high mettle, walked into the 1 j 
water, and tried to cross by himself; but the j 
current seized him, swept him along with it, 
and drowned him in its depths. Cyrus, enraged 

at the insolence of the river, threatened so to 
break its strength that in future even women 
should cross it easily without wetting their 
knees. Accordingly he put off for a time his at- 1 
tack on Babylon, and, dividing his army into | 
two parts, he marked out by ropes one hundred j 
and eighty trenches on each side of the Gyndes, | 
leading off from it in all directions, and setting ■ 
his army to dig, some on one side of the river, I 
some on the other, he accomplished his threat 
by the aid of so great a number of hands, but I 
not without losing thereby the whole summer 1 
season. ' 

190. Having, however, thus wreaked his 
vengeance on the Gyndes, by dispersing it 
through three hundred and sixty channels, Cy- 





186-193] THE HISTORY 43 


rus, with the first approach of the ensuing 
spring, marched forward against Babylon. The 
Babylonians, encamped without their walls, 
awaited his coming. A battle was fought at a 
short distance from the city, in which the Bab¬ 
ylonians were defeated by the Persian king, 
whereupon they withdrew within their de¬ 
fences. Here they shut themselves up, and 
made light of his siege, having laid in a store 
of provisions for many years in preparation 
against this attack; for when they saw Cyrus 
conquering nation after nation, they were con¬ 
vinced that he would never stop, and that their 
turn would come at last. 

191. Cyrus was now reduced to great per¬ 
plexity, as time went on and he made no prog¬ 
ress against the place. In this distress either 
some one made the suggestion to him, or he 
bethought himself of a plan, which he proceed¬ 
ed to put in execution. He placed a portion of 
his army at the point where the river enters the 
city, and another body at the back of the place 
where it issues forth, with orders to march into 
the town by the bed of the stream, as soon as 
the water became shallow enough: he then 
himself drew off with the unwarlike portion of 
his host, and made for the place where Nito- 
cris dug the basin for the river, where he did 
exactly what she had done formerly: he turned 
the Euphrates by a canal into the basin, which 
was then a marsh, on which the river sank to 
such an extent that the natural bed of the 
stream became fordable. Hereupon the Per¬ 
sians who had been left for the purpose at Bab¬ 
ylon by the river-side, entered the stream, 
which had now sunk so as to reach about mid¬ 
way up a man’s thigh, and thus got into the town. 
Had the Babylonians been apprised of what 
Cyrus was about, or had they noticed their dan¬ 
ger, they would never have allowed the Per¬ 
sians to enter the city, but would have de¬ 
stroyed them utterly; for they would have 
made fast all the street-gates which gave upon 
the river, and mounting upon the walls along 
both sides of the stream, would so have caught 
the enemy, as it were, in a trap. But, as it was, 
the Persians came upon them by surprise and 
so took the city. Owing to the vast size of the 
place, the inhabitants of the central parts (as 
the residents at Babylon declare) long after the 
outer portions of the town were taken, knew 
nothing of what had chanced, but as they were 
engaged in a festival, continued dancing and 
revelling until they learnt the capture but too 
certainly. Such, then, were the circumstances 
of the first taking of Babylon. 


192. Among many proofs which I shall 
bring forward of the power and resources of 
the Babylonians, the following is of special ac¬ 
count. The whole country under the (dominion 
of the Persians, besides paying a fixed tribute, 
is parcelled out into divisions, which have to 
supply food to the Great King and his army 
during different portions of the year. Now out 
of the twelve months which go to a year, the 
district of Babylon furnishes food during four, 
the other regions of Asia during eight; by 
which it appears that Assyria, in respect of re¬ 
sources, is one-third of the whole of Asia. Of 
all the Persian governments, or satrapies as 
they are called by the natives, this is by far the 
best. When Tritantaechmes, son of Artabazus, 
held it of the king, it brought him in an artaba 
of silver every day. The artaba is a Persian mea¬ 
sure, and holds three chcenixes more than the 
medimnus of the Athenians. He also had, be¬ 
longing to his own private stud, besides war- 
horses, eight hundred stallions and sixteen 
thousand mares, twenty to each stallion. Be¬ 
sides which he kept so great a number of In¬ 
dian hounds, that four large villages of the 
plain were exempted from all other charges on 
condition of finding them in food. 

193. But little rain falls in Assyria, enough, 
however, to make the corn begin to sprout, aft¬ 
er which the plant is nourished and the ears 
formed by means of irrigation from the river. 
For the river does not, as in Egypt, overflow 
the corn-lands of its own accord, but is spread 
over them by the hand, or by the help of en¬ 
gines. The whole of Babylonia is, like Egypt, 
intersected with canals. The largest of them all, 
which runs towards the winter sun, and is im¬ 
passable except in boats, is carried from the 
Euphrates into another stream, called the Ti¬ 
gris, the river upon which the town of Nineveh 
formerly stood. Of all the countries that we 
know there is none which is so fruitful in 
grain. It makes no pretension indeed of grow¬ 
ing the fig, the olive, the vine, or any other 
tree of the kind; but in grain it is so fruitful as 
to yield commonly two-hundred-fold, and 
when the production is the greatest, even three- 
hundred-fold. The blade of the wheat-plant 
and barley-plant is often four fingers in 
breadth. As for the millet and the sesame, I 
shall not say to what height they grow, though 
within my own knowledge; for I am not igno¬ 
rant that what I have already written concern¬ 
ing the fruitfulness of Babylonia must seem in¬ 
credible to those who have never visited the 
country. The only oil they use is made from 


I 


44 HERODOTUS T Book i 


the sesame-plant. Palm-trees grow in great 
numbers over the whole of the flat country, 
mostly of the kind which bears fruit, and this 
fruit supplies them with bread, wine, and hon¬ 
ey. They are cultivated like the fig-tree in all 
res[>ects, among others in this. The natives tie 
the fruit of the male-palms, as they are called 
by the Greeks, to the branches of the date-bear¬ 
ing palm, to let the gall-fly enter the dates and 
rijx^n them, and to prevent the fruit from fall¬ 
ing off. The male-palms, like the wild fig-trees, 
have usually the gall-fly in their fruit. 

194. But that which surprises me most in the 
land, after the city itself, I will now proceed 
to mention. The boats which come down the 
river to Babylon are circular, and made of 
skins. The frames, which are of willow, are cut 
in the country of the Armenians above Assyria, 
and on these, which serve for hulls, a covering 
of skins is stretched outside, and thus the boats 
are made, without either stem or stern, quite 
round like a shield. They are then entirely 
filled with straw, and their cargo is put on 
board, after which they are suffered to float 
down the stream. Their chief freight is wine, 
stored in casks made of the wood of the palm- 
tree. They are managed by two men who stand 
upright in them, each plying an oar, one pull¬ 
ing and the other pushing. The boats are of 
various sizes, some larger, some smaller; the 
biggest reach as high as five thousand talents’ 
burthen. Each vessel has a live ass on board; 
those of larger size have more than one. When 
they reach Babylon, the cargo is landed and 
offered for sale; after which the men break 
up their boats, sell the straw and the frames, 
and loading their asses with the skins, set 
off on their way back to Armenia. The current 
is too strong to allow a boat to return up¬ 
stream, for which reason they make their boats 
of skins rather than wood. On their return to 
Armenia they build fresh boats for the next 
voyage. 

195. The dress of the Babylonians is a linen 
tunic reaching to the feet, and above it another 
tunic made in wool, besides which they have a 
short white cloak thrown round them, and 
shoes of a peculiar fashion, not unlike those 
worn by the Boeotians. They have long hair, 
wear turbans on their heads, and anoint their 
whole body with perfumes. Every one carries a 
seal, and a walking-stick, carved at the top into 
the form of an apple, a rose, a lily, an eagle, or 
something similar; for it is not their habit to 
use a stick without an ornament. 

196. Of their customs, whereof I shall now 


proceed to give an account, the following 
(which I understand belongs to them in com¬ 
mon with the Illyrian tribe of the Eneti) is the | 
wisest in my judgment. Once a year in each vil- , 
lage the maidens of age to marry were collected ' 
all together into one place; while the men stood ^ 
round them in a circle. Then a herald called up I 
the damsels one by one, and offered them for 
sale. He began with the most beautiful. When 
she was sold for no small sum of money, he 
offered for sale the one who came next to her 
in beauty. All of them were sold to be wives. 
The richest of the Babylonians who wished to 
wed bid against each other for the loveliest 
maidens, while the humbler wife-seekers, who 
were indifferent about beauty, took the more 
homely damsels with marriage-portions. For 
the custom was that when the herald had gone 
through the whole number of the beautiful I 
damsels, he should then call up the ugliest—a 1 
cripple, if there chanced to be one—and offer 
her to the men, asking who would agree to 
take her with the smallest marriage-portion. ' 
And the man who offered to take the smallest H 
sum had her assigned to him. The marriage- 
portions were furnished by the money paid for || 
the beautiful damsels, and thus the fairer maid¬ 
ens portioned out the uglier. No one was al¬ 
lowed to give his daughter in marriage to the | 
man of his choice, nor might any one carry 
away the damsel whom he had purchased 
without finding bail really and truly to make 
her his wife; if, however, it turned out that 
they did not agree, the money might be paid 
back. All who liked might come even from dis- | 
tant villages and bid for the women. This was 
the best of all their customs, but it has now 
fallen into disuse. They have lately hit upon a 
very different plan to save their maidens from 
violence, and prevent their being torn from 
them and carried to distant cities, which is to 
bring up their daughters to be courtesans. This 
is now done by all the poorer of the common 
people, who since the conquest have been mal¬ 
treated by their lords, and have had ruin 
brought upon their families. 

197. The following custom seems to me the 
wisest of their institutions next to the one late- 
ly praised. They have no physicians, but when 
a man is ill, they lay him in the public square, 
and the passers-by come up to him, and if they 
have ever had his disease themselves or have 
known any one who has suffered from it, they 
give him advice, recommending him to do 
whatever they found good in their own case, 
or in the case known to them; and no one is al- 


i 







194-203] THE HISTORY 45 


lowed to pass the sick man in silence without 
asking him what his ailment is. 

198. They bury their dead in honey, and 
have funeral lamentations like the Egyptians. 
When a Babylonian has consorted with his 
wife, he sits down before a censer of burning 
incense, and the woman sits opposite to him. 
At dawn of day they wash; for till they are 
washed they will not touch any of their com¬ 
mon vessels. This practice is observed also by 
the Arabians. 

199. The Babylonians have one most shame¬ 
ful custom. Every woman born in the country 
must once in her life go and sit down in the 
precinct of Venus, and there consort with a 
stranger. Many of the wealthier sort, who are 
too proud to mix with the others, drive in cov¬ 
ered carriages to the precinct, followed by a 
goodly train of attendants, and there take their 
station. But the larger number seat themselves 
within the holy enclosure with wreaths of 
string about their heads—and here there is al¬ 
ways a great crowd, some coming and others 
going; lines of cord mark out paths in all di¬ 
rections among the women, and the strangers 
pass along them to make their choice. A wo¬ 
man who has once taken her seat is not al¬ 
lowed to return home till one of the strangers 
throws a silver coin into her lap, and takes her 
with him beyond the holy ground. When he 
throws the coin he says these words—“The 
goddess Mylitta prosper thee.” (Venus is called 
Mylitta by the Assyrians.) The silver coin may 
be of any size; it cannot be refused, for that is 
forbidden by the law, since once thrown it is 
sacred. The woman goes with the first man 
who throws her money, and rejects no one. 
When she has gone with him, and so satisfied 
the goddess, she returns home, and from that 
time forth no gift however great will prevail 
with her. Such of the women as are tall and 
beautiful are soon released, but others who are 
ugly have to stay a long time before they can 
fulfil the law. Some have waited three or four 
years in the precinct. A custom very much like 
this is found also in certain parts of the island 
of Cyprus, 

200. Such are the customs of the Babylon¬ 
ians generally. There are likewise three tribes 
among them who eat nothing but fish. These 
are caught and dried in the sun, after which 
they are brayed in a mortar, and strained 
through a linen sieve. Some prefer to make 
cakes of this material, while others bake it into 
a kind of bread. 

201. When Cyrus had achieved the conquest 


of the Babylonians, he conceived the desire of 
bringing the Massagetae under his dominion. 
Now the Massagetae are said to be a great and 
warlike nation, dwelling eastward, toward the 
rising of the sun, beyond the river Araxes, and 
opposite the Issedonians. By many they are re¬ 
garded as a Scythian race. 

202. As for the Araxes, it is, according to 
some accounts, larger, according to others 
smaller than the Ister (Danube). It has islands 
in it, many of which are said to be equal in size 
to Lesbos, The men who inhabit them feed 
during the summer on roots of all kinds, which 
they dig out of the ground, while they store up 
the fruits, which they gather from the trees at 
the fitting season, to serve them as food in the 
winter-time. Besides the trees whose fruit they 
gather for this purpose, they have also a tree 
which bears the strangest produce. When they 
are met together in companies they throw some 
of it upon the fire round which they are sitting, 
and presently, by the mere smell of the fumes 
which it gives out in burning, they grow 
drunk, as the Greeks do with wine. More of 
the fruit is then thrown on the fire, and, their 
drunkenness increasing, they often jump up 
and begin to dance and sing. Such is the ac¬ 
count which I have heard of this people. 

The river Araxes, like the Gyndes, which 
Cyrus dispersed into three hundred and sixty 
channels, has its source in the country of the 
Matienians. It has forty mouths, whereof all, 
except one, end in bogs and swamps. These 
bogs and swamps are said to be inhabited by a 
race of men who feed on raw fish, and clothe 
themselves with the skins of seals. The other 
mouth of the river flows with a clear course 
into the Caspian Sea.^ 

203. The Caspian is a sea by itself, having no 
connection with any other. The sea frequented 
by the Greeks, that beyond the Pillars of Her¬ 
cules, which is called the Atlantic, and also the 
Erythraean, are all one and the same sea. But 
the Caspian is a distinct sea, lying by itself, in 
length fifteen days’ voyage with a row-boat, in 
breadth, at the broadest part, eight days’ voy¬ 
age. Along its western shore runs the chain of 
the Caucasus, the most extensive and loftiest 
of all mountain-ranges. Many and various are 
the tribes by which it is inhabited, most of 
whom live entirely on the wild fruits of the 
forest. In these forests certain trees are said to 
grow, from the leaves of which, pounded and 

^ Herodotus appears to have confused together 
the information which had reached him concern¬ 
ing two or three distinct streams. 


I 


46 HERODOTUS f Book i 


mixed vvdth water, the inhabitants make a dye, 
wherewith they paint upon their clothes the 
figures of animals; and the figures so im¬ 
pressed never wash out, but last as though they 
had been inwoven in the cloth from the first, 
and wear as long as the garment. 

204. On the west then, as I have said, the 
Caspian Sea is bounded by the range of Cau¬ 
casus. On the east it is followed by a vast plain, 
stretching out interminably before the eye, the 
greater portion of which is possessed by those 
Nlassagets, against whom Cyrus was now so 
anxious to make an expedition. Many strong 
motives weighed with him and urged him on 
—his birth especially, which seemed some¬ 
thing more than human, and his good fortune 
in all his former wars, wherein he had always 
found that against what country soever he 
turned his arms, it was impossible for that 
people to escape. 

205. At this time the Massagetae were ruled 
by a queen, named Tomyris, who at the death 
of her husband, the late king, had mounted the 
throne. To her Cyrus sent ambassadors, with 
instructions to court her on his part, pretending 
that he wished to take her to wife. Tomyris, 
however, aware that it was her kingdom, and 
not herself, that he courted, forbade the men 
to approach. Cyrus, therefore, finding that he 
did not advance his designs by this deceit, 
marched towards the Araxes, and openly dis¬ 
playing his hostile intentions, set to work to 
construct a bridge on which his army might 
cross the river, and began building towers upon 
the boats which were to be used in the passage. 

206. While the Persian leader was occupied 
in these labours, Tomyris sent a herald to him, 
who said, “King of the Medes, cease to press 
this enterprise, for thou canst not know if what 
thou art doing will be of real advantage to thee. 
Be content to rule in peace thy own kingdom, 
and bear to see us reign over the countries that 
are ours to govern. As, however, I know thou 
wilt not choose to hearken to this counsel, since 
there is nothing thou less desirest than peace 
and quietness, come now, if thou art so might¬ 
ily desirous of meeting the Massagetae in arms, 
leave thy useless toil of bridge-making; let us 
retire three days’ march from the river bank, 
and do thou come across with thy soldiers; or, 
if thou likest better to give us battle on thy side 
the stream, retire thyself an equal distance.” 
Cyrus, on this offer, called together the chiefs 
of the Persians, and laid the matter before 
them, requesting them to advise him what he 
should do. All the votes were in favour of his 


letting Tomyris cross the stream, and giving \ 
battle on Persian ground. ' 

207. But Croesus the Lydian, who was pres- I 
ent at the meeting of the chiefs, disapproved P 
of this advice; he therefore rose, and thus de¬ 
livered his sentiments in opposition to it: “Oh! I 
my king! I promised thee long since, that, as ^ 
Jove had given me into thy hands, I would, to n 
the best of my power, avert impending danger |l 
from thy house. Alas! my own sufferings, by i 
their very bitterness, have taught me to be B 
keen-sighted of dangers. If thou deemest thy- 'j 
self an immortal, and thine army an army of ) 
immortals, my counsel will doubtless be 
thrown away upon thee. But if thou feelest thy- I 
self to be a man, and a ruler of men, lay this • 
first to heart, that there is a wheel on which the 
affairs of men revolve, and that its movement 
forbids the same man to be always fortunate. 
Now concerning the matter in hand, my 
judgment runs counter to the judgment of 
thy other counsellors. For if thou agreest to 
give the enemy entrance into thy country, | 
consider what risk is run! Lose the battle, and 
therewith thy whole kingdom is lost. For as¬ 
suredly, the Massagetae, if they win the fight, | 
will not return to their homes, but will push 
forward against the states of thy empire. Or if 
thou gainest the battle, why, then thou gainest 1 
far less than if thou wert across the stream, 
where thou mightest follow up thy victory. For ^ 
against thy loss, if they defeat thee on thine j 
own ground, must be set theirs in like case. Rout 
their army on the other side of the river, and 
thou mayest push at once into the heart of their 
country. Moreover, were it not disgrace intol¬ 
erable for Cyrus the son of Cambyses to retire 
before and yield ground to a woman? My 
counsel, therefore, is that we cross the stream, 
and pushing forward as far as they shall fall 
back, then seek to get the better of them by 
stratagem. I am told they are unacquainted 
with the good things on which the Persians 
live, and have never tasted the great delights of 
life. Let us then prepare a feast for them in our 
camp; let sheep be slaughtered without stint, 
and the winecups be filled full of noble liquor, 
and let all manner of dishes be prepared: then 
leaving behind us our worst troops, let us fall 
back towards the river. Unless I very much 
mistake, when they see the good fare set out, 
they will forget all else and fall to. Then it 
will remain for us to do our parts manfully.” 

208. Cyrus, when the two plans were thus 
placed in contrast before him, changed his 
mind, and preferring the advice which Croesus 





204-214] THE HISTORY 47 


had given, returned for answer to Tomyris 
that she should retire, and that he would cross 
the stream. She therefore retired, as she had en¬ 
gaged; and Cyrus, giving Croesus into the care 
of his son Cambyses (whom he had appointed 
to succeed him on the throne), with strict 
charge to pay him all respect and treat him 
well, if the expedition failed of success; and 
sending them both back to Persia, crossed the 
river with his army. 

209. The first night after the passage, as he 
slept in the enemy’s country, a vision appeared 
to him. He seemed to see in his sleep the eldest 
of the sons of Hystaspes, with wings upon his 
shoulders, shadowing with the one wing Asia, 
and Europe with the other. Now Hystaspes, 
the son of Arsames, was of the race of the 
Achaemenidae, and his eldest son, Darius, was 
at that time scarce twenty years old; wherefore, 
not being of age to go to the wars, he had re¬ 
mained behind in Persia. When Cyrus woke 
from his sleep, and turned the vision over in 
his mind, it seemed to him no light matter. He 
therefore sent for Hystaspes, and taking him 
aside said, “Hystaspes, thy son is discovered to 
be plotting against me and my crown. I will 
tell thee how I know it so certainly. The gods 
watch over my safety, and warn me before¬ 
hand of every danger. Now last night, as I lay 
in my bed, I saw in a vision the eldest of thy 
sons with wings upon his shoulders, shadow¬ 
ing with the one wing Asia, and Europe with 
the other. From this it is certain, beyond all 
possible doubt, that he is engaged in some plot 
against me. Return thou then at once to Persia, 
and be sure, when I come back from conquer¬ 
ing the Massagetae, to have thy son ready to 
produce before me, that I may examine him.” 

210. Thus Cyrus spoke, in the belief that he 
was plotted against by Darius; but he missed 
the true meaning of the dream, which was sent 
by God to forewarn him, that he was to die 
then and there, and that his kingdom was to 
fall at last to Darius. 

Hystaspes made answer to Cyrus in these 
words:—“Heaven forbid, sire, that there 
should be a Persian living who would plot 
against thee! If such an one there be, may a 
speedy death overtake him! Thou foundest the 
Persians a race of slaves, thou hast made them 
free men: thou foundest them subject to others, 
thou hast made them lords of all. If a vision has 
announced that my son is practising against 
thee, lo, I resign him into thy hands to deal 
with as thou wilt.” Hystaspes, when he had 
thus answered, recrossed the Araxes and has¬ 


tened back to Persia, to keep a watch on his 
son Darius. 

211. Meanwhile Cyrus, having advanced a 
day’s march from the river, did as Croesus had 
advised him, and, leaving the worthless por¬ 
tion of his army in the camp, drew off with his 
good troops towards the river. Soon after¬ 
wards, a detachment of the Massagetse, one- 
third of their entire army, led by Spargapises, 
son of the queen Tomyris, coming up, fell 
upon the body which had been left behind by 
Cyrus, and on their resistance put them to the 
sword. Then, seeing the banquet prepared, 
they sat down and began to feast. When they 
had eaten and drunk their fill, and were now 
sunk in sleep, the Persians under Cyrus ar¬ 
rived, slaughtered a great multitude, and made 
even a larger number prisoners. Among these 
last was Spargapises himself. 

212. When Tomyris heard what had befall¬ 
en her son and her army, she sent a herald to 
Cyrus, who thus addressed the conqueror:— 
“Thou bloodthirsty Cyrus, pride not thyself 
on this poor success: it was the grape-juice— 
which, when ye drink it, makes you so mad, 
and as ye swallow it down brings up to your 
lips such bold and wicked words—it was this 
poison wherewith thou didst ensnare my child, 
and so overcamest him, not in fair open fight. 
Now hearken what I advise, and be sure I ad¬ 
vise thee for thy good. Restore my son to me 
and get thee from the land unharmed, trium¬ 
phant over a third part of the host of the Mas- 
sagetas. Refuse, and I swear by the sun, the sov¬ 
ereign lord of the Massagetae, bloodthirsty as 
thou art, I will give thee thy fill of blood.” 

213. To the words of this message Cyrus 
paid no manner of regard. As for Spargapises, 
the son of the queen, when the wine went off, 
and he saw the extent of his calamity, he made 
request to Cyrus to release him from his bonds; 
then, when his prayer was granted, and the 
fetters were taken from his limbs, as soon as his 
hands were free, he destroyed himself. 

214. Tomyris, when she found that Cyrus 
paid no heed to her advice, collected all the 
forces of her kingdom, and gave him battle. 
Of all the combats in which the barbarians 
have engaged among themselves, I reckon this 
to have been the fiercest. The following, as I 
understand, was the manner of it:—First, the 
two armies stood apart and shot their arrows 
at each other; then, when their quivers were 
empty, they closed and fought hand-to-hand 
with lances and daggers; and thus they con¬ 
tinued fighting for a length of time, neither 



I 


HERODOTUS 


48 

choosing to give ground. At length the Mas- 
sagetae prevailed. The greater part of the army 
of the Persians was destroyed and Cyrus him¬ 
self fell, after reigning nine and twenty years. 
Search was made among the slain by order of 
the queen for the body of Cyrus, and when it 
was found she took a skin, and, filling it full 
of human blood, she dipped the head of Cyrus 
in the gore, saying, as she thus insulted the 
corse, “I live and have conquered thee in fight, 
and yet by thee am I ruined, for thou tookest 
my son with guile; but thus I make good my 
threat, and give thee thy fill of blood.” Of the 
many different accounts which are given of 
the death of Cyrus, this which I have followed 
appears to me most worthy of credit. 

215. In their dress and mode of living the 
Massagetse resemble the Scythians. They fight 
both on horseback and on foot, neither method 
is strange to them: they use bows and lances, 
but their favourite weapon is the battle-axe. 
Their arms are all either of gold or brass. For 
their spear-points, and arrow-heads, and for 
their battle-axes, they make use of brass; for 
head-gear, belts, and girdles, of gold. So too 
with the caparison of their horses, they give 


them breastplates of brass, but employ gold i 
about the reins, the bit, and the cheek-plates. , 
They use neither iron nor silver, having none 
in their country; but they have brass and gold 
in abundance. 

216. The following are some of their cus- I 
toms;—Each man has but one wife, yet all the 
wives are held in common; for this is a custom 
of the Massagetae and not of the Scythians, as 
the Greeks wrongly say. Human life does not 
come to its natural close with this people; but 
when a man grows very old, all his kinsfolk 
collect together and offer him up in sacrifice; 
offering at the same time some cattle also. Af- ' 
ter the sacrifice they boil the flesh and feast on ( 
it; and those who thus end their days are reck- f 
oned the happiest. If a man dies of disease they 1 
do not eat him, but bury him in the ground, be- l 
wailing his ill-fortune that he did not come to |i 
be sacrificed. They sow no grain, but live on ) 
their herds, and on fish, of which there is great 
plenty in the Araxes. Milk is what they chiefly ^ 
drink. The only god they worship is the sun, 
and to him they offer the horse in sacrifice; un- i 
der the notion of giving to the swiftest of the 
gods the swiftest of all mortal creatures. , 



