The Sixth Book, Entitled 
ERATO 




I. Aristagoras, the author of the Ionian re¬ 
volt, perished in the 'way which I have de¬ 
scribed. Meanwhile Histiceus, tyrant of Mile¬ 
tus, who had been allowed by Darius to leave 
Susa, came down to Sardis. On his arrival, 
being asked by Artaphernes, the Sardian 
satrap, what he thought was the reason that 
the lonians had rebelled, he made answer that 
he could not conceive, and it had astonished 
him greatly, pretending to be quite uncon¬ 
scious of the whole business. Artaphernes, 
however, who perceived that he was dealing 
dishonestly, and who had in fact full knowl¬ 
edge of the whole history of the outbreak, said 
to him, “I will tell thee how the case stands, 
Histiaeus: this shoe is of thy stitching; Arista- 
goras has but put it on.” 

2. Such was the remark made by Arta¬ 
phernes concerning the rebellion. Histiaeus, 
alarmed at the knowledge which he displayed, 
so soon as night fell, fled away to the coast. 
Thus he forfeited his word to Darius; for 
though he had pledged himself to bring 
Sardinia, the biggest island in the whole 
world, under the Persian yoke, he in reality 
sought to obtain the direction of the war 
against the king. Crossing over to Chios, he 
was there laid in bonds by the inhabitants, 
who accused him of intending some mischief 
against them in the interest of Darius. How¬ 
ever, when the whole truth was laid before 
them, and they found that Histiaeus was in 
reality a foe to the king, they forthwith set him 
at large again. 

3. After this the lonians inquired of him 
for what reason he had so strongly urged Aris- 
tagoras to revolt from the king, thereby doing 
their nation so ill a service. In reply, he took 
good care not to disclose to them the real cause, 
but told them that King Darius had intended 
to remove the Phoenicians from their own 
country, and place them in Ionia, while he 


planted the lonians in Phoenicia, and that it 
was for this reason he sent Aristagoras the 
order. Now it was not true that the king had 
entertained any such intention, but Histiaeus 
succeeded hereby in arousing the fears of the 
lonians. 

4. After this, Histiaeus, by means of a cer¬ 
tain Hermippus, a native of Atarneus, sent 
letters to many of the Persians in Sardis, who 
had before held some discourse with him con¬ 
cerning a revolt. Hermippus, however, instead 
of conveying them to the persons to whom they 
were addressed, delivered them into the hands 
of Artaphernes, who, perceiving what was on 
foot, commanded Hermippus to deliver the 
letters according to their addresses, and then 
bring him back the answers which were sent 
to Histiaeus. The traitors being in this way dis¬ 
covered, Artaphernes put a number of Persians 
to death, and caused a commotion in Sardis. 

5. As for Histiaeus, when his hopes in this 
matter were disappointed, he persuaded the 
Chians to carry him back to Miletus; but the 
Milesians were too well pleased at having got 
quit of Aristagoras to be anxious to receive 
another tyrant into their country; besides 
which they had now tasted liberty. They there¬ 
fore opposed his return; and when he en¬ 
deavoured to force an entrance during the 
night, one of the inhabitants even wounded 
him in the thigh. Having been thus rejected 
from his country, he went back to Chios; 
whence, after failing in an attempt to induce 
the Chians to give him ships, he crossed over 
to Mytilene, where he succeeded in obtaining 
vessels from the Lesbians. They fitted out a 
squadron of eight triremes, and sailed with 
him to the Hellespont, where they took up 
their station, and proceeded to seize all the 
vessels which passed out from the Euxine, un¬ 
less the crews declared themselves ready to 
obey his orders. 





THE HISTORY 


6. While Histia:us and the Mytilenaeans 
were thus employed, Miletus was expecting an 
attack from a vast armament, which comprised 
both a fleet and also a land force. The Persian 
captains had drawn their several detachments 
together, and formed them into a single army; 
and had resolved to pass over all the other 
cities, which they regarded as of lesser account, 
and to march straight on Miletus. Of the 
naval states, Phoenicia showed the greatest 
zeal; but the fleet was composed likewise 
of the Cyprians (who had so lately been 
brought under), the Cilicians, and also the 
Egyptians. 

7. While the Persians were thus making 
preparations against Miletus and Ionia, the 
lonians, informed of their intent, sent their 
deputies to the Panionium, and held a council 
upon the posture of their affairs. Hereat it was 
determined that no land force should be col¬ 
lected to oppose the Persians, but that the 
Milesians should be left to defend their own 
walls as they could; at the same time they 
agreed that the whole naval force of the states, 
not excepting a single ship, should be 
equipped, and should muster at Lade, a small 
island lying off Miletus—to give battle on be¬ 
half of the place. 

8. Presently the lonians began to assemble 
in their ships, and with them came the iEoli- 
ans of Lesbos; and in this way they marshalled 
their line:—The wing towards the east was 
formed of the Milesians themselves, who fur¬ 
nished eighty ships; next to them came the 
Prienians with twelve, and the Myusians with 
three ships; after the Myusians were stationed 
the Teians, whose ships were seventeen; then 
the Chians, who furnished a hundred. The 
Erythraeans and Phocaeans followed, the for¬ 
mer with eight, the latter with three ships; be¬ 
yond the Phocaeans were the Lesbians, furnish¬ 
ing seventy; last of all came the Samians, 
forming the western wing, and furnishing 
sixty vessels. The fleet amounted in all to three 
hundred and fifty-three triremes. Such was the 
number on the Ionian side. 

9. On the side of the barbarians the number 
of vessels was six hundred. These assembled 
off the coast of Milesia, while the land army 
collected upon the shore; but the leaders, learn¬ 
ing the strength of the Ionian fleet, began to 
fear lest they might fail to defeat them, in 
which case, not having the mastery at sea, they 
would be unable to reduce Miletus, and might 
in consequence receive rough treatment at the 
hands of Darius. So when they thought of all 


187 

these things, they resolved on the following 
course:—Calling together the Ionian tyrants, 
who had fled to the Medes for refuge when 
Aristagoras deposed them from their govern¬ 
ments, and who were now in camp, having 
joined in the expedition against Miletus, the 
Persians addressed them thus: “Men of Ionia, 
now is the fit time to show your zeal for the 
house of the king. Use your best efforts, every 
one of you, to detach your fellow-countrymen 
from the general body. Hold forth to them the 
promise that, if they submit, no harm shall 
happen to them on account of their rebellion; 
their temples shall not be burnt, nor any of 
their private buildings; neither shall they be 
treated with greater harshness than before the 
outbreak. But if they refuse to yield, and de¬ 
termine to try the chance of a battle, threaten 
them with the fate which shall assuredly over¬ 
take them in that case. Tell them, when they 
are vanquished in fight, they shall be en¬ 
slaved; their boys shall be made eunuchs, and 
their maidens transported to Bactra; while 
their country shall be delivered into the hands 
of foreigners.” 

10. Thus spake the Persians. The Ionian 
tyrants sent accordingly by night to their re¬ 
spective citizens, and reported the words of 
the Persians; but the people were all staunch, 
and refused to betray their countrymen, those 
of each state thinking that they alone had had 
overtures made to them. Now these events 
happened on the first appearance of the Per¬ 
sians before Miletus. 

11. Afterwards, while the Ionian fleet was 
still assembled at Lade, councils were held, 
and speeches made by divers persons—among 
the rest by Dionysius, the Phocaean captain, 
who thus expressed himself:—“Our affairs 
hang on the razor’s edge, men of Ionia, either 
to be free or to be slaves; and slaves, too, who 
have shown themselves runaways. Now then 
you have to choose whether you will endure 
hardships, and so for the present lead a life of 
toil, but thereby gain ability to overcome your 
enemies and establish your own freedom; or 
whether you will persist in this slothfulness 
and disorder, in which case I see no hope of 
your escaping the king’s vengeance for your 
rebellion. I beseech you, be persuaded by me, 
and trust yourselves to my guidance. Then, if 
the gods only hold the balance fairly between 
us, I undertake to say that our foes will either 
decline a battle, or, if they fight, suffer com¬ 
plete discomfiture.” 

12. These words prevailed with the lonians, 


188 HERODOTUS TBook vi 


and forthwith they committed themselves to 
Dionysius; whereupon he proceeded every day 
to make the ships move in column, and the 
rowers ply their oars, and exercise themselves 
in breaking the line; while the marines were 
held under arms, and the vessels were kept, till 
evening fell, upon their anchors, so that the 
men had nothing but toil from morning even 
to night. Seven days did the lonians continue 
obedient, and do whatsoever he bade them; 
but on the eighth day, worn out by the hard¬ 
ness of the work and the heat of the sun, and 
quite unaccustomed to such fatigues, they be¬ 
gan to confer together, and to say one to anoth¬ 
er, “What god have we offended to bring upon 
ourselves such a punishment as this? Fools and 
distracted that we were, to put ourselves into 
the hands of this Phocaean braggart, who does 
but furnish three ships to the fleet! He, now 
that he has got us, plagues us in the most 
desperate fashion; many of us, in consequence, 
have fallen sick already—many more expect 
to follow. We had better suffer anything rather 
than these hardships; even the slavery with 
which we are threatened, however harsh, can 
be no worse than our present thraldom. Come, 
let us refuse him obedience.” So saying, they 
forthwith ceased to obey his orders, and 
pitched their tents, as if they had been soldiers, 
upon the island, where they reposed under the 
shade all day, and refused to go aboard the 
ships and train themselves. 

13. Now when the Samian captains per¬ 
ceived what was taking place, they were more 
inclined than before to accept the terms which 
iEaces, the son of Syloson, had been authorised 
by the Persians to offer them, on condition of 
their deserting from the confederacy. For they 
saw that all was disorder among the lonians, 
and they felt also that it was hopeless to con¬ 
tend with the power of the king; since if they 
defeated the fleet which had been sent against 
them, they knew that another would come five 
times as great. So they took advantage of the 
occasion which now offered, and as soon as 
ever they saw the lonians refuse to work, has¬ 
tened gladly to provide for the safety of their 
temples and their properties. This iEaces, who 
made the overtures to the Samians, was the 
son of Syloson, and grandson of the earlier 
yEaces. He had formerly been tyrant of Samos, 
but was ousted from his government by Arista- 
goras the Milesian, at the same time with the 
other tyrants of the lonians. 

14. The Phcenicians soon afterwards sailed 
to the attack; and the lonians likewise put 


themselves in line, and went out to meet them. 
When they had now neared one another, and 
joined battle, which of the lonians fought like 
brave men and which like cowards, I cannot 
declare with any certainty, for charges are 
brought on all sides; but the tale goes that the 
Samians, according to the agreement which 
they had made with iEaces, hoisted sail, and 
quitting their post bore away for Samos, ex¬ 
cept eleven ships, whose captains gave no heed 
to the orders of the commanders, but remained 
and took part in the battle. The state of Samos, 
in consideration of this action, granted to these 
men, as an acknowledgment of their bravery, 
the honour of having their names, and the 
names of their fathers, inscribed upon a pillar, 
which still stands in the market-place. The 
Lesbians also, when they saw the Samians, 
who were drawn up next them, begin to flee, 
themselves did the like; and the example, once 
set, was followed by the greater number of the 
lonians. 

15. Of those who remained and fought, 
none were so rudely handled as the Chians, 
who displayed prodigies of valour, and dis¬ 
dained to play the part of cowards. They fur¬ 
nished to the common fleet, as I mentioned 
above, one hundred ships, having each of them 
forty armed citizens, and those picked men, on 
board; and when they saw the greater portion 
of the allies betraying the common cause, they 
for their part, scorning to imitate the base 
conduct of these traitors, although they were 
left almost alone and unsupported, a very few 
friends continuing to stand by them, notwith¬ 
standing went on with the fight, and ofttimes 
cut the line of the enemy, until at last, after 
they had taken very many of their adversaries’ 
ships, they ended by losing more than half of 
their own. Hereupon, with the remainder of 
their vessels, the Chians fled away to their own 
country. 

16. As for such of their ships as were dam¬ 
aged and disabled, these, being pursued by the 
enemy, made straight for Mycale, where the 
crews ran them ashore, and abandoning them 
began their march along the continent. Hap¬ 
pening in their way upon the territory of Ephe¬ 
sus, they essayed to cross it; but here a dire 
misfortune befell them. It was night, and the 
Ephesian women chanced to be engaged in 
celebrating the Thesmophoria—the previous 
calamity of the Chians had not been heard of 
—so when the Ephesians saw their country 
invaded by an armed band, they made no ques¬ 
tion of the new-comers being robbers who pur- 



13-23] the history 189 


posed to carry of! their women; and accord¬ 
ingly they marched out against them in full 
force, and slew them all. Such were the mis¬ 
fortunes which befell them of Chios. 

17. Dionysius, the Phocaean, when he per¬ 
ceived that all was lost, having first captured 
three ships from the enemy, himself took to 
flight. He would not, however, return to Pho- 
caea, which he well knew must fall again, like 
the rest of Ionia, under the Persian yoke; but 
straightway, as he was, he set sail for Phoenicia, 
and there sunk a number of merchantmen, 
and gained a great booty; after which he di¬ 
rected his course to Sicily, where he established 
himself as a corsair, and plundered the Cartha¬ 
ginians and Tyrrhenians, but did no harm to 
the Greeks. 

18. The Persians, when they had vanquished 
the lonians in the sea-fight, besieged Miletus 
both by land and sea, driving mines under the 
walls, and making use of every known device, 
until at length they took both the citadel and 
the town, six years from the time when the 
revolt first broke out under Aristagoras. All 
the inhabitants of the city they reduced to 
slavery, and thus the event tallied with the an¬ 
nouncement which had been made by the 
oracle. 

19. For once upon a time, when the Argives 
had sent to Delphi to consult the god about the 
safety of their own city, a prophecy was given 
them, in which others besides themselves were 
interested; for while it bore in part upon the 
fortunes of Argos, it touched in a by-clause the 
fate of the men of Miletus. I shall set down the 
portion which concerned the Argives when I 
come to that part of my History, mentioning 
at present only the passage in which the absent 
Milesians were spoken of. This passage was as 
follows:—• 

Then shall thou, Miletus, so oft the contriver of 

evil, 

Be, thyself, to many a feast and an excellent booty: 
Then shall thy matrons wash the feet of long¬ 
haired masters — 

Others shall then possess our lov’d Didymian tem¬ 
ple. 

Such a fate now befell the Milesians; for the 
Persians, who wore their hair long, after kill¬ 
ing most of the men, made the women and 
children slaves; and the sanctuary at Didyma, 
the oracle no less than the temple was plun¬ 
dered and burnt; of the riches whereof I have 
made frequent mention in other parts of my 
History. 

20. Those of the Milesians whose lives were 


spared, being carried prisoners to Susa, re¬ 
ceived no ill treatment at the hands of King 
Darius, but were established by him in Ampe, 
a city on the shores of the ErythnTan sea, near 
the spot where the Tigris flows into it. Miletus 
itself, and the plain about the city, were kept 
by the Persians for themselves, while the hill- 
country was assigned to the Carians of Pedasus. 

21. And now the Sybarites, who after the 
loss of their city occupied Laiis and Scidrus, 
failed duly to return the former kindness of 
the Milesians. For these last, when Sybaris was 
taken by the Crotoniats, made a great mourn¬ 
ing, all of them, youths as well as men, shav¬ 
ing their heads; since Miletus and Sybaris 
were, of all the cities whereof we have any 
knowledge, the two most closely united to one 
another. The Athenians, on the other hand, 
showed themselves beyond measure afflicted at 
the fall of Miletus, in many ways expressing 
their sympathy, and especially by their treat¬ 
ment of Phrynichus. For when this poet 
brought out upon the stage his drama of the 
Capture of Miletus, the whole theatre burst 
into tears; and the people sentenced him to 
pay a fine of a thousand drachms, for recalling 
to them their own misfortunes. They likewise 
made a law that no one should ever again 
exhibit that piece. 

22. Thus was Miletus bereft of its inhabi¬ 
tants. In Samos the people of the richer sort 
were much displeased with the doings of the 
captains, and the dealings they had had with 
the Medes; they therefore held a council, very 
shortly after the sea-fight, and resolved that 
they would not remain to become the slaves of 
iEaces and the Persians, but before the tyrant 
set foot in their country, would sail away and 
found a colony in another land. Now it 
chanced that about this time the Zanclaeans of 
Sicily had sent ambassadors to the lonians, and 
invited them to Kale-Acte, where they wished 
an Ionian city to be founded. This place, Kale- 
Acte (or the Fair Strand) as it is called, is in 
the country of the Sicilians, and is situated in 
the part of Sicily which looks towards Tyr- 
rhenia. The offer thus made to all the lonians 
was embraced only by the Samians, and by 
such of the Milesians as had contrived to effect 
their escape. 

23. Hereupon this is what ensued. The Sa¬ 
mians on their voyage reached the country of 
the Epizephyrian Locrians, at a time when the 
ZancliEans and their king Scythas were en¬ 
gaged in the siege of a Sicilian town which 
they hoped to take. Anaxilaiis, tyrant of Rhe- 


190 HERODOTUS [Book vi 


gium, who was on ill terms with the Zan- 
clsans, knowing how matters stood, made ap¬ 
plication to the Samians, and persuaded them 
to give up the thought of Kale-Acte, the place 
to which they were bound, and to seize Zancle 
itself, which was left without men. The Sa¬ 
mians followed this counsel and possessed 
themselves of the town; which the Zanclaeans 
no sooner heard than they hurried to the res¬ 
cue, calling to their aid Hippocrates, tyrant of 
Gela, who was one of their allies. Hippocrates 
came with his army to their assistance; but on 
his arrival he seized Scythas, the ZancLnean 
king, who had just lost his city, and sent him 
away in chains, together with his brother 
Pythogenes, to the town of Inycus; after which 
he came to an understanding with the Sa¬ 
mians, exchanged oaths with them, and agreed 
to betray the people of Zancle. The reward of 
his treachery was to be one-half of the goods 
and chattels, including slaves, which the town 
contained, and all that he could find in the 
open country. Upon this Hippocrates seized 
and bound the greater number of the Zan¬ 
claeans as slaves; delivering, however, into the 
hands of the Samians three hundred of the 
principal citizens, to be slaughtered; but the 
Samians spared the lives of these persons. 

24. Scythas, the king of the Zanclaeans, made 
his escape from Inycus, and fled to Himera; 
whence he passed into Asia, and went up to 
the court of Darius. Darius thought him the 
most upright of all the Greeks to whom he 
afTorded a refuge; for with the king's leave he 
paid a visit to Sicily, and thence returned back 
to Persia, where he lived in great comfort, and 
died by a natural death at an advanced age. 

25. Thus did the Samians escape the yoke 
of the Medes, and possess themselves without 
any trouble of Zancle, a most beautiful city. At 
Samos itself the Phcenicians, after the fight 
which had Miletus for its prize was over, re¬ 
established .^aces, the son of Syloson, upon his 
throne. This they did by the command of the 
Persians, who looked upon ^Eaces as one who 
had rendered them a high service and there¬ 
fore deserved well at their hands. They like¬ 
wise spared the Samians, on account of the 
desertion of their vessels, and did not burn 
either their city or their temples, as they did 
those of the other rebels. Immediately after the 
fall of Miletus the Persians recovered Caria, 
bringing some of the cities over by force, while 
others submitted of their own accord. 

26. Meanwhile tidings of what had befallen 
Miletus reached Histiaeus the Milesian, who 


was still at Byzantium, employed in intercept¬ 
ing the Ionian merchantmen as they issued 
from the Euxine. Histiaeus had no sooner heard 
the news than he gave the Hellespont in charge 
to Bisaltes, son of Apollophanes, a native of 
Abydos, and himself, at the head of his Lesbi¬ 
ans, set sail for Chios. One of the Chian gar¬ 
risons which opposed him he engaged at a 
place called “The Hollows,” situated in the 
Chian territory, and of these he slaughtered a 
vast number; afterwards, by the help of his 
Lesbians, he reduced all the rest of the Chians, 
who were weakened by their losses in the sea- 
fight, Polichne, a city of Chios, serving him as 
head-quarters. 

27. It mostly happens that there is some 
warning when great misfortunes are about to 
befall a state or nation; and so it was in this 
instance, for the Chians had previously had 
some strange tokens sent to them. A choir of 
a hundred of their youths had been despatched 
to Delphi; and of these only two had returned; 
the remaining ninety-eight having been car¬ 
ried ofi by a pestilence. Likewise, about the 
same time, and very shortly before the sea- 
fight, the roof of a school-house had fallen in 
upon a number of their boys, who were at 
lessons; and out of a hundred and twenty 
children there was but one left alive. Such were 
the signs which God sent to warn them. It 
was very shortly afterwards that the sea-fight 
happened, which brought the city down upon 
its knees; and after the sea-fight came the 
attack of Histiarus and his Lesbians, to whom 
the Chians, weakened as they were, furnished 
an easy conquest. 

28. Histiseus now led a numerous army, 
composed of lonians and ^Eolians, against 
Thasos, and had laid siege to the place when 
news arrived that the Phoenicians were about 
to quit Miletus and attack the other cities of 
Ionia. On hearing this, Histiaeus raised the 
siege of Thasos, and hastened to Lesbos with 
all his forces. There his army was in great 
straits for want of food; whereupon Histiaeus 
left Lesbos and went across to the mainland, 
intending to cut the crops which were growing 
in the Atarnean territory, and likewise in the 
plain of the Caicus, which belonged to Mysia. 
Now it chanced that a certain Persian named 
Harpagus was in these regions at the head of 
an army of no little strength. He, when His- 
tiseus landed, marched out to meet him, and 
engaging with his forces destroyed the great¬ 
er number of them, and took Histia:us himself 
prisoner. 



24 ' 35 ] the history 191 


29. Histiaeus fell into the hands of the Per¬ 
sians in the following manner. The Greeks 
and Persians engaged at Malena, in the region 
of Atarneus; and the battle was for a long time 
stoutly contested, till at length the cavalry 
came up, and, charging the Greeks, decided 
the conflict. The Greeks fled; and Histiaeus, 
who thought that Darius would not punish 
his fault with death, showed how he loved 
his life by the following conduct. Overtaken 
in his flight by one of the Persians, who was 
about to run him through, he cried aloud in 
the Persian tongue that he was Histiaeus the 
Milesian. 

30. Now, had he been taken straightway be¬ 
fore King Darius, I verily believe that he 
would have received no hurt, but the king 
would have freely forgiven him. Artaphernes, 
however, satrap of Sardis, and his captor 
Harpagus, on this very account—because they 
were afraid that, if he escaped, he would be 
again received into high favour by the king— 
put him to death as soon as he arrived at 
Sardis. His body they impaled at that place, 
while they embalmed his head and sent it up 
to Susa to the king. Darius, when he learnt 
what had taken place, found great fault with 
the men engaged in this business for not bring¬ 
ing Histiaeus alive into his presence, and com¬ 
manded his servants to wash and dress the 
head with all care, and then bury it, as the 
head of a man who had been a great benefactor 
to himself and the Persians. Such was the se¬ 
quel of the history of Histiaeus. 

31. The naval armament of the Persians 
wintered at Miletus, and in the following year 
proceeded to attack the islands ofll the coast, 
Chios, Lesbos, and Tenedos, which were re¬ 
duced without difficulty. Whenever they be¬ 
came masters of an island, the barbarians, in 
every single instance, netted the inhabitants. 
Now the mode in which they practise this 
netting is the following. Men join hands, so 
as to form a line across from the north coast to 
the south, and then march through the island 
from end to end and hunt out the inhabitants. 
In like manner the Persians took also the Io¬ 
nian towns upon the mainland, not however 
netting the inhabitants, as it was not possible. 

32. And now their generals made good all 
the threats wherewith they had menaced the 
lonians before the battle. For no sooner did 
they get possession of the towns than they 
choose out all the best favoured boys and made 
them eunuchs, while the most beautiful of the 
girls they tore from their homes and sent as 


presents to the king, at the same time burning 
the cities themselves, with their temples. Thus 
were the lonians for the third time reduced 
to slavery; once by the Lydians, and a second, 
and now a third time, by the Persians. 

33. The sea force, after quitting Ionia, pro¬ 
ceeded to the Hellespont, and took all the 
towns which lie on the left shore as one sails 
into the straits. For the cities on the right bank 
had already been reduced by the land force of 
the Persians. Now these are the places which 
border the Hellespont on the European side; 
the Chersonese, which contains a number of 
cities, Perinthus, the forts in Thrace, Selybria, 
and Byzantium. The Byzantines at this time, 
and their opposite neighbours, the Chalce- 
donians, instead of awaiting the coming of the 
Phoenicians, quitted their country, and sailing 
into the Euxine, took up their abode at the city 
of Mesembria. The Phoenicians, after burning 
all the places above mentioned, proceeded to 
Proconnesus and Artaca, which they likewise 
delivered to the flames; this done, they re¬ 
turned to the Chersonese, being minded to re¬ 
duce those cities which they had not ravaged 
in their former cruise. Upon Cyzicus they 
made no attack at all, as before their coming 
the inhabitants had made terms with QEbares, 
the son of Megabazus, and satrap of Dascyl- 
eium, and had submitted themselves to the 
king. In the Chersonese the Phoenicians sub¬ 
dued all the cities, excepting Cardia. 

34. Up to this time the cities of the Cherso¬ 
nese had been under the government of Miltia- 
des, the son of Cimon, and grandson of Stesa- 
goHs, to whom they had descended from 
Miltiades, the son of Cypselils, who obtained 
possession of them in the following manner. 
The Dolonci, a Thracian tribe, to whom the 
Chersonese at that time belonged, being har¬ 
assed by a war in which they were engaged 
with the Apsinthians, sent their princes to 
Delphi to consult the oracle about the matter. 
The reply of the Pythoness bade them “take 
back with them as a colonist into their country 
the man who should first ofler them hospital¬ 
ity after they quitted the temple.'’ The Dolonci, 
following the Sacred Road, passed through the 
regions of Phocis and Boeotia; after which, as 
still no one invited them in, they turned aside, 
and travelled to Athens. 

35. Now Pisistratus was at this time sole 
lord of Athens; but Miltiades, the son of 
Cypselus, was likewise a person of much dis¬ 
tinction. He belonged to a family which was 
wont to contend in the four-horse-chariot races. 



192 HERODOTUS [Book vi 


and traced its descent to /Eacus and Egina, but 
which, from the time of Philaeas, the son of 
Ajax, who was the first Athenian citizen of 
the house, had been naturalised at Athens. It 
happened that as the Dolonci passed his door 
Miltiades was sitting in his vestibule, which 
caused him to remark them, dressed as they 
were in outlandish garments, and armed more¬ 
over with lances. He therefore called to them, 
and, on their approach, invited them in, oflfer- 
ing them lodging and entertainment. The 
strangers accepted his hospitality, and, after 
the banquet was over, they laid before him in 
full the directions of the oracle and besought 
him on their own part to yield obedience to 
the god. Miltiades was persuaded ere they had 
done speaking; for the government of Pisi- 
stratus was irksome to him, and he wanted to 
be beyond the tyrant’s reach. He therefore 
went straightway to Delphi, and inquired of 
the oracle whether he should do as the Dolonci 
desired. 

36. As the Pythoness backed their request, 
Miltiades, son of Cypselus who had already 
won the four-horse chariot-race at Olympia, 
left Athens, taking with him as many of the 
Athenians as liked to join in the enterprise, 
and sailed away with the Dolonci. On his ar¬ 
rival at the Chersonese, he was made king by 
those who had invited him. After this his first 
act was to build a wall across the neck of the 
Chersonese from the city of Cardia to Pactya, 
to protect the country from the incursions and 
ravages of the Apsinthians. The breadth of the 
isthmus at this part is thirty-six furlongs, the 
whole length of the peninsula within the isth¬ 
mus being four hundred and twenty furlongs. 

37. When he had finished carrying the wall 
across the isthmus, and had thus secured the 
Chersonese against the Apsinthians, Miltiades 
proceeded to engage in other wars, and first of 
all attacked the Lampsacenians; but falling 
into an ambush which they had laid he had the 
misfortune to be taken prisoner. Now it hap¬ 
pened that Miltiades stood high in the favour 
of Croesus, king of Lydia. When Croesus there¬ 
fore heard of his calamity, he sent and com¬ 
manded the men of Lampsacus to give Mil¬ 
tiades his freedom; “if they refused,” he said, 
“he would destroy them like a fir.” Then the 
Lampsacenians were somewhile in doubt about 
this speech of Croesus, and could not tell how 
to construe his threat “that he would destroy 
them like a fir”; but at last one of their elders 
divined the true sense, and told them that the 
fir is the only tree which, when cut down. 


makes no fresh shoots, but forthwith dies out¬ 
right. So the Lampsacenians, being greatly 
afraid of Croesus, released Miltiades, and let 
him go free. 

38. Thus did Miltiades, by the help of Croe¬ 
sus, escape this danger. Some time afterwards 
he died childless, leaving his kingdom and his 
riches to Stesagoras, who was the son of Ci- 
mon, his half-brother. Ever since his death the 
people of the Chersonese have offered him the 
customary sacrifices of a founder; and they 
have further established in his honour a gym- 
nic contest and a chariot-race, in neither of 
which is it lawful for any Lampsacenian to 
contend. Before the war with Lampsacus was 
ended Stesagoras too died childless: he was 
sitting in the hall of justice when he was struck 
upon the head with a hatchet by a man who 
pretended to be a deserter, but was in good 
sooth an enemy, and a bitter one. 

39. Thus died Stesagoras; and upon his death 
the Pisistratidae fitted out a trireme, and sent 
Miltiades, the son of Cimon, and brother of 
the deceased, to the Chersonese, that he might 
undertake the management of affairs in that 
quarter. They had already shown him much 
favour at Athens, as if, forsooth, they had 
been no parties to the death of his father Ci¬ 
mon—a matter whereof I will give an account 
in another place. He upon his arrival remained 
shut up within the house, pretending to do 
honour to the memory of his dead brother; 
whereupon the chief people of the Chersonese 
gathered themselves together from all the cit¬ 
ies of the land, and came in a procession to the 
place where Miltiades was, to condole with 
him upon his misfortune. Miltiades command¬ 
ed them to be seized and thrown into prison; 
after which he made himself master of the 
Chersonese, maintained a body of five hun¬ 
dred mercenaries, and married Hegesipyla, 
daughter of the Thracian king Olorus. 

40. This Miltiades, the son of Cimon, had 
not been long in the country when a calamity 
befell him yet more grievous than those in 
which he was now involved: for three years 
earlier he had had to fly before an incursion of 
the Scyths. These nomads, angered by the at¬ 
tack of Darius, collected in a body and 
marched as far as the Chersonese. Miltiades 
did not await their coming, but fled, and re¬ 
mained away until the Scyths retired, when 
the Dolonci sent and fetched him back. All 
this happened three years before the events 
which befell Miltiades at the present time. 

41. He now no sooner heard that the Phoe- 



36 - 45 ] the history 193 


nicians were attacking Tenedos than he load¬ 
ed five triremes with his goods and chattels, 
and set sail for Athens. Cardia was the point 
from which he took his departure; and as he 
sailed down the gulf of Melas, along the shore 
of the Chersonese, he came suddenly upon the 
whole Phoenician fleet. However he himself 
escaped, with four of his vessels, and got into 
Imbrus, one trireme only falling into the hands 
of his pursuers. This vessel was under the com¬ 
mand of his eldest son Metiochus, whose 
mother was not the daughter of the Thracian 
king Olorus, but a different woman. Metio¬ 
chus and his ship were taken; and when the 
Phoenicians found out that he was a son of 
Miltiades they resolved to convey him to the 
king, expecting thereby to rise high in the 
royal favour. For they remembered that it was 
Miltiades who counselled the lonians to heark¬ 
en when the Scyths prayed them to break up 
the bridge and return home. Darius, however, 
when the Phoenicians brought Metiochus into 
his presence, was so far from doing him any 
hurt, that he loaded him with benefits. He 
gave him a house and estate, and also a Per¬ 
sian wife, by whom there were children born 
to him who were accounted Persians. As for 
Miltiades himself, from Imbrus he made his 
way in safety to Athens. 

42. At this time the Persians did no more 
hurt to the lonians; but on the contrary, before 
the year was out, they carried into effect the 
following measures, which were greatly to 
their advantage. Artaphernes, satrap of Sardis, 
summoned deputies from all the Ionian cities, 
and forced them to enter into agreements 
with one another, not to harass each other by 
force of arms, but to settle their disputes by 
reference. He likewise took the measurement 
of their whole country in parasangs—such is 
the name which the Persians give to a distance 
of thirty furlongs—and settled the tributes 
which the several cities were to pay, at a rate 
that has continued unaltered from the time 
when Artaphernes fixed it down to the present 
day. The rate was very nearly the same as that 
which had been paid before the revolt. Such 
were the peaceful dealings of the Persians with 
the lonians. 

43. The next spring Darius superseded all 
the other generals, and sent down Mardonius, 
the son of Gobryas, to the coast, and with him 
a vast body of men, some fit for sea, others for 
land service. Mardonius was a youth at this 
time, and had only lately married Artazostra, 
the king’s daughter. When Mardonius, ac¬ 


companied by this numerous host, reached Ci¬ 
licia, he took ship and proceeded along shore 
with his fleet, while the land army marched 
under other leaders towards the Hellespont. In 
the course of his voyage along the coast of Asia 
he came to Ionia; and here I have a marvel to 
relate which will greatly surprise those Greeks 
who cannot believe that Otanes advised the 
seven conspirators to make Persia a common¬ 
wealth. Mardonius put down all the despots 
throughout Ionia, and in lieu of them estab¬ 
lished democracies. Having so done, he has¬ 
tened to the Hellespont, and when a vast mul¬ 
titude of ships had been brought together, and 
likewise a powerful land force, he conveyed 
his troops across the strait by means of his ves¬ 
sels, and proceeded through Europe against 
Eretria and Athens. 

44. At least these towns served as a pretext 
for the expedition, the real purpose of which 
was to subjugate as great a number as possible 
of the Grecian cities; and this became plain 
when the Thasians, who did not even lift a 
hand in their defence, were reduced by the sea 
force, while the land army added the Mace¬ 
donians to the former slaves of the king. All 
the tribes on the hither side of Macedonia had 
been reduced previously. From Thasos the 
fleet stood across to the mainland, and sailed 
along shore to Acanthus, whence an attempt 
was made to double Mount Athos. But here a 
violent north wind sprang up, against which 
nothing could contend, and handled a large 
number of the ships with much rudeness, shat¬ 
tering them and driving them aground upon 
Athos. ’Tis said the number of the ships de¬ 
stroyed was little short of three hundred; and 
the men who perished were more than twenty 
thousand. For the sea about Athos abounds in 
monsters beyond all others; and so a portion 
were seized and devoured hy these animals, 
while others were dashed violently against the 
rocks; some, who did not know how to swim, 
were engulfed; and some died of the cold. 

45. While thus it fared with the fleet, on 
land Mardonius and his army were attacked 
in their camp during the night by the Brygi, a 
tribe of Thracians; and here vast numbers of 
the Persians were slain, and even Mardonius 
himself received a wound. The Brygi, never¬ 
theless, did not succeed in maintaining their 
own freedom: for Mardonius would not leave 
the country till he had subdued them and 
made them subjects of Persia. Still, though he 
brought them under the yoke, the blow which 
his land force had received at their hands, and 




194 HERODOTUS [Book vi 


the great damage done to his fleet off Athos, 
induced him to set out upon his retreat; and so 
this armament, having failed disgracefully, re¬ 
turned to Asia. 

46. The year after these events, Darius re¬ 
ceived information from certain neighbours of 
the Thasians that those islanders were making 
preparations for revolt; he therefore sent a 
herald, and bade them dismantle their walls, 
and bring all their ships to Abdera. The Thasi¬ 
ans, at the time when Histiaeus the Milesian 
made his attack upon them, had resolved that, 
as their income was very great, they would ap>- 
ply their wealth to building ships of war, and 
surrounding their city with another and a 
stronger wall. Their revenue was derived part¬ 
ly from their possessions upon the mainland, 
partly from the mines which they owned. They 
were masters of the gold mines at Scapte-Hyle, 
the yearly produce of which amounted in all 
to eighty talents. Their mines in Thasos yield¬ 
ed less, but still were so far prolific that, besides 
being entirely free from land-tax, they had a 
surplus income, derived from the two sources 
of their territory on the main and their mines, 
in common years of two hundred, and in the 
best years of three hundred talents. 

47. I myself have seen the mines in ques¬ 
tion: by far the most curious of them are those 
which the Phoenicians discovered at the time 
when they went with Thasus and colonised the 
island, which afterwards took its name from 
him. These Phoenician workings are in Thasos 
itself, between Coenyra and a place called 

ra, over against Samothrace: a huge moun¬ 
tain has been turned upside down in the search 
for ores. Such then was the source of their 
wealth. On this occasion no sooner did the 
Great King issue his commands than straight¬ 
way the Thasians dismantled their wall, and 
took their whole fleet to Abdera. 

48. After this Darius resolved to prove the 
Greeks, and try the bent of their minds, 
whether they were inclined to resist him in 
arms or prepared to make their submission. He 
therefore sent out heralds in divers directions 
round about Greece, with orders to demand 
everywhere earth and water for the king. At 
the same time he sent other heralds to the vari¬ 
ous seaport towns which paid him tribute, and 
required them to provide a number of ships 
of war and horse-transports. 

49. These towns accordingly began their 
preparations; and the heralds who had been 
sent into Greece obtained what the king had 
bid them ask from a large number of the states 


upon the mainland, and likewise from all the 
islanders whom they visited. Among these last 
were included the Eginetans, who, equally 
with the rest, consented to give earth and wa¬ 
ter to the Persian king. 

When the Athenians heard what the Egine¬ 
tans had done, believing that it was from en¬ 
mity to themselves that they had given consent, 
and that the Eginetans intended to join the 
Persian in his attack upon Athens, they 
straightway took the matter in hand. In good 
truth it greatly rejoiced them to have so fair a 
pretext; and accordingly they sent frequent 
embassies to Sparta, and made it a charge 
against the Eginetans that their conduct in this 
matter proved them to be traitors to Greece. 

50. Hereupon Cleomenes, the son of Anax- 
andridas, who was then king of the Spartans, 
went in person to Egina, intending to seize 
those whose guilt was the greatest. As soon 
however as he tried to arrest them, a number of 
the Eginetans made resistance; a certain Crius, 
son of Polycritus, being the foremost in vio¬ 
lence. This person told him “he should not car¬ 
ry off a single Eginetan without it costing him 
dear—the Athenians had bribed him to make 
this attack, for which he had no warrant from 
his own government—otherwise both the 
kings would have come together to make the 
seizure.” This he said in consequence of in¬ 
structions which he had received from Demar- 
atus. Hereupon Cleomenes, finding that he 
must quit Egina, asked Crius his name; and 
when Crius told him, “Get thy horns tipped 
with brass with all speed, O Crius!” he said, 
“for thou wilt have to struggle with a great 
danger.” 

51. Meanwhile Demaratus, son of Ariston, 
was bringing charges against Cleomenes at 
Sparta. He too, like Cleomenes, was king of 
the Spartans, but he belonged to the lower 
house—not indeed that his house was of any 
lower origin than the other, for both houses 
are of one blood—but the house of Eurys- 
thenes is the more honoured of the two, inas¬ 
much as it is the elder branch. 

52. The Lacedaemonians declare, contradict¬ 
ing therein all the poets, that it was king Aris- 
todemus himself, son of Aristomachus, grand¬ 
son of Cleodaeus, and great-grandson of Hyl- 
lus, who conducted them to the land which 
they now possess, and not the sons of Aristo- 
demus. The wife of Aristodemus, whose name 
(they say) was Argeia, and who was daughter 
of Autesion, son of Tisamenus, grandson of 
Thersander, and great-grandson of Polynices, 



46 - 57 ] the history 195 


within a little while after their coming into the 
country, gave birth to twins. Aristodemus just 
lived to see his children, but died soon after¬ 
wards of a disease. The Lacedaemonians of 
that day determined, according to custom, to 
take for their king the elder of the two chil¬ 
dren; but they were so alike, and so exactly of 
one size, that they could not possibly tell which 
of the two to choose: so when they found 
themselves unable to make a choice, or haply 
even earlier, they went to the mother and asked 
her to tell them which was the elder, where¬ 
upon she declared that “she herself did not 
know the children apart”; although in good 
truth she knew them very well, and only 
feigned ignorance in order that, if it were pos¬ 
sible, both of them might be made kings of 
Sparta. The Lacedaemonians were now in a 
great strait; so they sent to Delphi and in¬ 
quired of the oracle how they should deal with 
the matter. The Pythoness made answer, “Let 
both be taken to be kings; but let the elder 
have the greater honour.” So the Lacedaemoni¬ 
ans were in as great a strait as before, and 
could not conceive how they were to discover 
which was the first-born, till at length a cer¬ 
tain Messenian, by name Panites, suggested to 
them to watch and see which of the two the 
mother washed and fed first; if they found she 
always gave one the preference, that fact 
would tell them all they wanted to know; if, 
on the contrary, she herself varied, and some¬ 
times took the one first, sometimes the other, 
it would be plain that she knew as little as 
they; in which case they must try some other 
plan. The Lacedaemonians did according to the 
advice of the Messenian, and, without letting 
her know why, kept a watch upon the mother; 
by which means they discovered that, when¬ 
ever she either washed or fed her children, she 
always gave the same child the preference. So 
they took the boy whom the mother honoured 
the most, and regarding him as the first-born, 
brought him up in the palace; and the name 
which they gave to the elder boy was Eurys- 
thenes, while his brother they called Procles. 
When the brothers grew up, there was always, 
so long as they lived, enmity between them; 
and the houses sprung from their loins have 
continued the feud to this day. 

53. Thus much is related by the Lacedae¬ 
monians, but not by any of the other Greeks; 
in what follows I give the tradition of the 
Greeks generally. The kings of the Dorians 
(they say)—counting up to Perseus, son of 
Danae, and so omitting the god— are rightly 


given in the common Greek lists, and rightly 
considered to have been Greeks themselves; 
for even at this early time they ranked among 
that people. I say “up to Perseus,” and not 
further, because Perseus has no mortal father 
by whose name he is called, as Plercules has in 
Amphitryon; whereby it appears that I have 
reason on my side, and am right in saying, “up 
to Perseus.” If we follow the line of Danae, 
daughter of Acrisius, and trace her progeni¬ 
tors, we shall find that the chiefs of the Dori¬ 
ans are really genuine Egyptians. In the gen¬ 
ealogies here given I have followed the com¬ 
mon Greek accounts. 

54. According to the Persian story, Perseus 
was an Assyrian who became a Greek; his 
ancestors, therefore, according to them, were 
not Greeks. They do not admit that the fore¬ 
fathers of Acrisius were in any way related to 
Perseus, but say they were Egyptians, as the 
Greeks likewise testify. 

55. Enough however of this subject. How it 
came to pass that Egyptians obtained the king¬ 
doms of the Dorians, and what they did to 
raise themselves to such a position, these are 
questions concerning which, as they have been 
treated by others, I shall say nothing. I proceed 
to speak of points on which no other writer has 
touched. 

56. The prerogatives which the Spartans 
have allowed their kings are the following. In 
the first place, two priesthoods, those (namely) 
of Lacedaemonian and of Celestial Jupiter; 
also the right of making war on what country 
soever they please, without hindrance from 
any of the other Spartans, under pain of out¬ 
lawry; on service the privilege of marching 
first in the advance and last in the retreat, and 
of having a hundred picked men for their 
bodyguard while with the army; likewise the 
liberty of sacrificing as many cattle in their ex¬ 
peditions as it seems them good, and the right 
of having the skins and the chines of the 
slaughtered animals for their own use. 

57. Such are their privileges in war; in peace 
their rights are as follows. When a citizen 
makes a public sacrifice the kings are given the 
first seats at the banquet; they are served be¬ 
fore any of the other guests, and have a double 
portion of everything; they take the lead in 
the libations; and the hides of the sacrificed 
beasts belong to them. Every month, on the 
first day, and again on the seventh of the first 
decade,^ each king receives a beast without 

^ The division of the Greek month was into dec¬ 
ades. 




196 HERODOTUS IBook vi 


blemish at the public cost, which he offers up 
to Apollo; likewise a medimnus of meaU and 
of wine a Laconian quart. In the contests of 
the Games they have always the seat of hon¬ 
our; they appoint the citizens who have to en¬ 
tertain foreigners; they also nominate, each of 
them, two of the Pythians, officers whose busi¬ 
ness it is to consult the oracle at Delphi, who 
eat with the kings, and, like them, live at the 
public charge. If the kings do not come to the 
public supper, each of them must have two 
choen'ixes of meal and a cotyle of wine sent 
home to him at his house; if they come, they 
are given a double quantity of each, and the 
same when any private man invites them to 
his table. They have the custody of all the 
oracles which are pronounced; but the Pythi¬ 
ans must likewise have knowledge of them. 
They have the whole decision of certain causes, 
which are these, and these only:—When a 
maiden is left the heiress of her father’s estate, 
and has not been betrothed by him to any one, 
they decide who is to marry her; in all matters 
concerning the public highways they judge; 
and if a person wants to adopt a child, he must 
do it before the kings. They likewise have the 
right of sitting in council with the eight-and- 
twenty senators; and if they are not present, 
then the senators nearest of kin to them have 
their privileges, and give two votes as the royal 
proxies, besides a third vote, which is their 
own. 

58. Such are the honours which the Spartan 
people have allowed their kings during their 
lifetime; after they are dead other honours 
await them. Horsemen carry the news of their 
death through all Laconia, while in the city the 
women go hither and thither drumming upon 
a kettle. At this signal, in every house two free 
persons, a man and a woman, must put on 
mourning, or else be subject to a heavy fine. 
The Lacedaemonians have likewise a custom 
at the demise of their kings which is common 
to them with the barbarians of Asia—indeed 
with the greater number of the barbarians ev¬ 
erywhere—namely, that when one of their 
kings dies, not only the Spartans, but a certain 
number of the country people from every part 
of Laconia are forced, whether they will or no, 
to attend the funeral. So these persons and the 
helots, and likewise the Spartans themselves, 
flock together to the number of several thou¬ 
sands, men and women intermingled; and all 

^ The medimnus was about 12 gallons, the choe- 
nix somewhat less than a quart, and a cotyle half 
a pint. 


of them smite their foreheads violently, and 
weep and wail without stint, saying always 
that their last king was the best. If a king dies 
in battle, then they make a statue of him, and 
placing it upon a couch right bravely decked, 
so carry it to the grave. After the burial, by the 
space of ten days there is no assembly, nor do 
they elect magistrates, but continue mourning 
the whole time. 

59. They hold with the Persians also in an¬ 
other custom. When a king dies, and another 
comes to the throne, the newly-made monarch 
forgives all the Spartans the debts which they 
owe either to the king or to the public treasury. 
And in like manner among the Persians each 
king when he begins to reign remits the tribute 
due from the provinces. 

60. In one respect the Lacedaemonians re¬ 
semble the Egyptians. Their heralds and flute- 
players, and likewise their cooks, take their 
trades by succession from their fathers. A flute- 
player must be the son of a flute-player, a cook 
of a cook, a herald of a herald; and other peo¬ 
ple cannot take advantage of the loudness of 
their voice to come into the profession and 
shut out the heralds’ sons; but each follows his 
father’s business. Such are the customs of the 
Lacedaemonians. 

61. At the time of which we are speaking, 
while Cleomenes in Egina was labouring for 
the general good of Greece, Demaratus at 
Sparta continued to bring charges against him, 
moved not so much by love of the Eginetans as 
by jealousy and hatred of his colleague. Cleo¬ 
menes therefore was no sooner returned from 
Egina than he considered with himself how he 
might deprive Demaratus of his kingly office: 
and here the following circumstance furnished 
a ground for him to proceed upon. Ariston, 
king of Sparta, had been married to two 
wives, but neither of them had borne him any 
children; as however he still thought it was 
possible he might have offspring, he resolved to 
wed a third; and this was how the wedding 
was brought about. He had a certain friend, a 
Spartan, with whom he was more intimate 
than with any other citizen. This friend was 
married to a wife whose beauty far surpassed 
that of all the other women in Sparta; and 
what was still more strange, she had once been 
as ugly as she now was beautiful. For her 
nurse, seeing how ill-favoured she was, and 
how sadly her parents, who were wealthy peo¬ 
ple, took her bad looks to heart, bethought her¬ 
self of a plan, which was to carry the child ev¬ 
ery day to the temple of Helen at Therapna, 




58 - 66 ] THE HISTORY 197 


which stands above the Phoebeum, and there 
to place her before the image, and beseech the 
goddess to take away the child’s ugliness. One 
day, as she left the temple, a woman appeared 
to her, and begged to know what it was she 
held in her arms. The nurse told her it was a 
child, on which she asked to see it; but the 
nurse refused; the parents, she said, had for¬ 
bidden her to show the child to any one. How¬ 
ever the woman would not take a denial; and 
the nurse, seeing how highly she prized a look, 
at last let her see the child. Then the woman 
gently stroked its head, and said, “One day 
this child shall be the fairest dame in Sparta.” 
And her looks began to change from that very 
day. When she was of marriageable age, Age- 
tus, son of Alcides, the same whom I have 
mentioned above as the friend of Ariston, 
made her his wife. 

62. Now it chanced that Ariston fell in love 
with this person; and his love so preyed upon 
his mind that at last he devised as follows. He 
went to his friend, the lady’s husband, and 
proposed to him that they should exchange 
gifts, each taking that which pleased him best 
out of all the possessions of the other. His 
friend, who felt no alarm about his wife, since 
Ariston was also married, consented readily; 
and so the matter was confirmed between 
them by an oath. Then Ariston gave Agetus 
the present, whatever it was, of which he had 
made choice, and when it came to his turn to 
name the present which he was to receive in 
exchange, required to be allowed to carry 
home with him Agetus’s wife. But the other 
demurred, and said, “except his wife, he might 
have anything else”: however, as he could not 
resist the oath which he had sworn, or the 
trickery which had been practised on him, at 
last he suffered Ariston to carry her away to 
his house. 

63. Ariston hereupon put away his second 
wife and took for his third this woman; and 
she, in less than the due time—when she had 
not yet reached her full term of ten months— 
gave birth to a child, the Demaratus of whom 
we have spoken. Then one of his servants 
came and told him the news, as he sat in coun¬ 
cil with the Ephors; whereat, remembering 
when it was that the woman became his wife, 
he counted the months upon his fingers, and 
having so done, cried out with an oath, “The 
boy cannot be mine.” This was said in the hear¬ 
ing of the Ephors; but they made no account 
of it at the time. The boy grew up; and Aris¬ 
ton repented of what he had said; for he be¬ 


came altogether convinced that Demaratus was 
truly his son. The reason why he named him 
Demaratus was the following. Some time be¬ 
fore these events the whole Spartan people, 
looking upon Ariston as a man of mark be¬ 
yond all the kings that had reigned at Sparta 
before him, had offered up a prayer that he 
might have a son. On this account, therefore, 
the name Demaratus was given. 

64. In course of time Ariston died; and 
Demaratus received the kingdom: but it was 
fated, as it seems, that these words, when bruit¬ 
ed abroad, should strip him of his sovereignty. 
This was brought about by means of Cleo- 
menes, whom he had twice sorely vexed, once 
when he led the army home from Eleusis, and 
a second time when Cleomenes was gone 
across to Egina against such as had espoused 
the side of the Medes. 

65. Cleomenes now, being resolved to have 
his revenge upon Demaratus, went to Leoty- 
chides, the son of Menares, and grandson of 
Agis, who was of the same family as Demara¬ 
tus, and made agreement with him to this ten¬ 
or following. Cleomenes was to lend his aid to 
make Leotychides king in the room of De¬ 
maratus; and then Leotychides was to take 
part with Cleomenes against the Eginetans. 
Now Leotychides hated Demaratus chiefly 
on account of Percalus, the daughter of Chilon, 
son of Demarmenus: this lady had been be¬ 
trothed to Leotychides; but Demaratus laid a 
plot, and robbed him of his bride, forestalling 
him in carrying her off, and marrying her. 
Such was the origin of the enmity. At the time 
of which we speak, Leotychides was prevailed 
upon by the earnest desire of Cleomenes to 
come forward against Demaratus and make 
oath “that Demaratus was not rightful king of 
Sparta, since he was not the true son of Aris¬ 
ton.” After he had thus sworn, Leotychides 
sued Demaratus, and brought up against him 
the phrase which Ariston had let drop when, 
on the coming of his servant to announce to 
him the birth of his son, he counted the 
months, and cried out with an oath that the 
child was not his. It was on this speech of Aris- 
ton’s that Leotychides relied to prove that 
Demaratus was not his son, and therefore not 
rightful king of Sparta; and he produced as 
witnesses the Ephors who were sitting with 
Ariston at the time and heard what he said. 

66. At last, as there came to be much strife 
concerning this matter, the Spartans made a 
decree that the Delphic oracle should be asked 
to say whether Demaratus were Ariston’s son 



198 HERODOTUS I Book vi 


or no. Cleomenes set them upon this plan; and 
no sooner was the decree passed than he made 
a friend of Cobon, the son of Aristophantus, a 
man of the greatest weight among the Del- 
phians; and this Cobon prevailed upon Perial- 
la, the prophetess, to give the answer which 
Cleomenes wished. Accordingly, when the sa¬ 
cred messengers came and put their question, 
the Pythoness returned for answer “that De- 
maratus was not Ariston’s son.” Some time 
afterwards all this became known; and Cobon 
was forced to fly from Delphi; while Perialla 
the prophetess was deprived of her office. 

67. Such were the means whereby the depo¬ 
sition of Demaratus was brought about; but 
his flying from Sparta to the Medes was by 
reason of an affront which was put upon him. 
On losing his kingdom he had been made a 
magistrate; and in that office soon afterwards, 
when the feast of the Gymnopaediae came 
around, he took his station among the lookers- 
on; whereupon Leotychides, who was now 
king in his room, sent a servant to him and 
asked him, by way of insult and mockery, 
“how it felt to be a magistrate after one had 
been a king?” Demaratus, who was hurt at the 
question, made answer—“Tell him I have 
tried them both, but he has not. Howbeit this 
speech will be the cause to Sparta of infinite 
blessings or else of infinite woes.” Having thus 
spoken he wrapped his head in his robe, and, 
leaving the theatre, went home to his own 
house, where he prepared an ox for sacrifice, 
and offered it to Jupiter, after which he called 
for his mother. 

68. When she appeared, he took of the en¬ 
trails, and placing them in her hand, besought 
her in these words following:— 

“Dear mother, I beseech you, by all the gods, 
and chiefly by our own hearth-god Jupiter, tell 
me the very truth, who was really my father. 
For Leotychides, in the suit which we had to¬ 
gether, declared that when thou becamest Ar¬ 
iston’s wife thou didst already bear in thy 
womb a child by thy former husband, and oth¬ 
ers repeat a yet more disgraceful tale, that our 
groom found favour in thine eyes, and that I 
am his son. I entreat thee therefore by the gods 
to tell me the truth. For if thou hast gone 
astray, thou hast done no more than many a 
woman; and the Spartans remark it as strange, 
if I am Ariston’s son, that he had no children 
by his other wives.” 

69. Thus spake Demaratus; and his mother 
replied as follows: “Dear son, since thou en- 
treatest so earnestly for the truth, it shall in¬ 


deed be fully told to thee. When Ariston 
brought me to his house, on the third night 
after my coming, there appeared to me one like 
to Ariston, who, after staying with me a while, 
rose, and taking the garlands from his own 
brows placed them upon my head, and so went 
away. Presently after Ariston entered, and 
when he saw the garlands which I still wore, 
asked me who gave them to me. I said, ’twas 
he; but this he stoutly denied; whereupon I 
solemnly swore that it was none other, and 
told him he did not do well to dissemble when 
he had so lately risen from my side and left the 
garlands with me. Then Ariston, when he 
heard my oath, understood that there was 
something beyond nature in what had taken 
place. And indeed it appeared that the gar¬ 
lands had come from the hero-temple which 
stands by our court gates—the temple of him 
they call Astrabacus—and the soothsayers, 
moreover, declared that the apparition was 
that very person. And now, my son, I have 
told thee all thou wouldest fain know. Either 
thou art the son of that hero—either thou may- 
est call Astrabacus sire; or else Ariston was thy 
father. As for that matter which they who hate 
thee urge the most, the words of Ariston, who, 
when the messenger told him of thy birth, de¬ 
clared before many witnesses that ‘thou wert 
not his son, forasmuch as the ten months were 
not fully-out,’ it was a random speech, uttered 
from mere ignorance. The truth is, children 
are born not only at ten months, but at nine, 
and even at seven. Thou wert thyself, my son, 
a seven months’ child. Ariston acknowledged, 
no long time afterwards, that his speech sprang 
from thoughtlessness. Hearken not then to 
other tales concerning thy birth, my son: for 
be assured thou hast the whole truth. As for 
grooms, pray Heaven Leotychides and all who 
speak as he does may suffer wrong from 
them!” Such was the mother’s answer. 

70. Demaratus, having learnt all that he 
wished to know, took with him provision for 
the journey, and went into Elis, pretending 
that he purposed to proceed to Delphi, and 
there consult the oracle. The Lacedaemonians, 
however, suspecting that he meant to fly his 
country, sent men in pursuit of him; but De¬ 
maratus hastened, and leaving Elis before they 
arrived, sailed across to Zacynthus. The Lace¬ 
daemonians followed, and sought to lay hands 
upon him, and to separate him from his re¬ 
tinue; but the Zacynthians would not give him 
up to them: so he escaping, made his way af¬ 
terwards by sea to Asia, and presented him- 




67 - 76 ] THE HISTORY 199 


self before King Darius, who received him 
generously, and gave him both lands and cit- 
ies. Such was the chance which drove Demara- 
tus to Asia, a man distinguished among the 
Lacedaemonians for many noble deeds and 
wise counsels, and who alone of all the Spartan 
kings brought honour to his country by win¬ 
ning at Olympia the prize in the four-horse 
chariot-race. 

71. After Demaratus was deposed, Leoty- 
chides, the son of Menares, received the king¬ 
dom. He had a son, Zeuxidamus, called Cynis- 
cus by many of the Spartans. This Zeuxidamus 
did not reign at Sparta, but died before his 
father, leaving a son, Archidamus. Leoty- 
chides, when Zeuxidamus was taken from 
him, married a second wife, named Eury- 
dame, the sister of Menius and daughter of Di- 
actorides. By her he had no male offspring, 
but only a daughter called Lampito, whom he 
gave in marriage to Archidamus, Zeuxidamus’ 
son. 

72. Even Leotychides, however, did not 
spend his old age in Sparta, but suffered a 
punishment whereby Demaratus was fully 
avenged. He commanded the Lacedaemonians 
when they made war against Thessaly, and 
might have conquered the whole of it, but was 
bribed by a large sum of money. It chanced 
that he was caught in the fact, being found 
sitting in his tent on a gauntlet, quite full of 
silver. Upon this he was brought to trial and 
banished from Sparta; his house was razed to 
the ground; and he himself fled to Tegea, 
where he ended his days. But these events took 
place long afterwards. 

73. At the time of which we are speaking, 
Cleomenes, having carried his proceedings in 
the matter of Demaratus to a prosperous issue, 
forthwith took Leotychides with him, and 
crossed over to attack the Eginetans; for his 
anger was hot against them on account of the 
affront which they had formerly put upon him. 
Hereupon the Eginetans, seeing that both the 
kings were come against them, thought it best 
to make no further resistance. So the two kings 
picked out from all Egina the ten men who for 

; wealth and birth stood the highest, among 
whom were Crius, son of Polycritus, and Ca- 
sambus, son of Aristocrates, who wielded the 
chief power; and these men they carried with 
them to Attica, and there deposited them in 
the hands of the Athenians, the great enemies 
of the Eginetans. 

74. Afterwards, when it came to be known 
what evil arts had been used against Demara¬ 


tus, Cleomenes was seized with fear of his own 
countrymen, and fled into Thessaly. From 
thence he passed into Arcadia, where he began 
to stir up troubles, and endeavoured to unite 
the Arcadians against Sparta. He bound them 
by various oaths to follow him whithersover 
he should lead, and was even desirous of tak¬ 
ing their chief leaders with him to the city of 
Nonacris, that he might swear them to his 
cause by the waters of the Styx. For the waters 
of Styx, as the Arcadians say, are in that city, 
and this is the appearance they present: you 
see a little water, dripping from a rock into 
a basin, which is fenced round by a low wall. 
Nonacris, where this fountain is to be seen, is a 
city of Arcadia near Pheneus. 

75. When the Lacedaemonians heard how 
Cleomenes was engaged, they were afraid, and 
agreed with him that he should come back to 
Sparta and be king as before. So Cleomenes 
came back; but had no sooner returned than 
he, who had never been altogether of sound 
mind, was smitten with downright madness. 
This he showed by striking every Spartan he 
met upon the face with his sceptre. On his be¬ 
having thus, and showing that he was gone 
quite out of his mind, his kindred imprisoned 
him, and even put his feet in the stocks. While 
so bound, finding himself left alone with a 
single keeper, he asked the man for a knife. 
The keeper at first refused, whereupon Cleo¬ 
menes began to threaten him, until at last he 
was afraid, being only a helot, and gave him 
what he required. Cleomenes had no sooner 
got the steel than, beginning at his legs, he 
horribly disfigured himself, cutting gashes in 
his flesh, along his legs, thighs, hips, and loins, 
until at last he reached his belly, which he 
likewise began to gash, whereupon in a little 
time he died. The Greeks generally think that 
this fate came upon him because he induced 
the Pythoness to pronounce against Demara¬ 
tus; the Athenians differ from all others in say¬ 
ing that it was because he cut down the sacred 
grove of the goddesses when he made his in¬ 
vasion by Eleusis; while the Argives ascribe it 
to his having taken from their refuge and cut 
to pieces certain Argives who had fled from bat¬ 
tle into a precinct sacred to Argus, where Cleo¬ 
menes slew them, burning likewise at the same 
time, through irreverence, the grove itself. 

76. For once, when Cleomenes had sent to 
Delphi to consult the oracle, it was prophesied 
to him that he should take Argos; upon which 
he went out at the head of the Spartans, and 
led them to the river Erasinus. This stream is 




I 

200 HERODOTUS [Book vi 


reported to flow from the Stymphalian lake, 
the waters of which empty themselves into a 
pitch-dark chasm, and then (as they say) re¬ 
appear in Argos, where the Argives call them 
the Erasinus. Cleomenes, having arrived upon 
the banks of this river, proceeded to offer sac¬ 
rifice to it, but, in spite of all that he could do, 
the victims were not favourable to his crossing. 
So he said that he admired the god for refus¬ 
ing to betray his countrymen, but still the Ar¬ 
gives should not escape him for all that. He 
then withdrew his troops, and led them down 
to Thyrea, where he sacrificed a bull to the 
sea, and conveyed his men on shipboard to 
Nauplia in the Tirynthian territory. 

77. The Argives, when they heard of this, 
marched down to the sea to defend their 
country; and arriving in the neighbourhood of 
Tiryns, at the place which bears the name of 
Sepeia, they pitched their camp opposite to the 
Lacedaemonians, leaving no great space be¬ 
tween the hosts. And now their fear was not 
so much lest they should be worsted in open 
fight as lest some trick should be practised on 
them; for such was the danger which the ora¬ 
cle given to them in common with the Milesi¬ 
ans seemed to intimate. The oracle ran as fol¬ 
lows:— 

Time shall be when the female shall conquer the 
male, and shall chase him 
Far away—gaining so great praise and honour in 
Argos; 

The?! full many an Argive woman her chee\s 
shall mangle — 

Hence^ in the times to come Twill be said by the 
men who are unborn, 

** Tamed by the spear expired the coiled terrible 
serpent” 

At the coincidence of all these things the Ar¬ 
gives were greatly cast down; and so they re¬ 
solved that they would follow the signals of 
the enemy's herald. Having made this resolve, 
they proceeded to act as follows: whenever the 
herald of the Lacedaemonians gave an order to 
the soldiers of his own army, the Argives did 
the like on their side. 

78. Now when Cleomenes heard that the 
Argives were acting thus, he commanded his 
troops that, so soon as the herald gave the word 
for the soldiers to go to dinner, they should 
instantly seize their arms and charge the host 
of the enemy. Which the Lacedaemonians did 
accordingly, and fell upon the Argives just as, 
following the signal, they had begun their re¬ 
past; whereby it came to pass that vast num¬ 
bers of the Argives were slain, while the rest. 


who were more than they which died in the 
fight, were driven to take refuge in the grove 
of Argus hard by, where they were surround¬ 
ed, and watch kept upon them. 

79. When things were at this pass Cleo¬ 
menes acted as follows; Having learnt the 
names of the Argives who were shut up in the 
sacred precinct from certain deserters who had 
come over to him, he sent a herald to summon 
them one by one, on pretence of having re¬ 
ceived their ransoms. Now the ransom of pris¬ 
oners among the Peloponnesians is fixed at 
two minae the man. So Cleomenes had these 
persons called forth severally, to the number 
of fifty, or thereabouts, and massacred them. 
All this while they who remained in the en¬ 
closure knew nothing of what was happening; 
for the grove was so thick that the people in¬ 
side were unable to see what was taking place 
without. But at last one of their number 
climbed up into a tree and spied the treachery; 1 
after which none of those who were sum¬ 
moned would go forth. 

80. Then Cleomenes ordered all the helots 
to bring brushwood, and heap it around the 
grove; which was done accordingly; and Cleo¬ 
menes set the grove on fire. As the flames 
spread he asked a des-erter “Who was the god 
of the grove}" whereto the other made answer, . 
“Argus.” So he, when he heard that, uttered 

a loud groan, and said:— 

“Greatly hast thou deceived me, Apollo, god 
of prophecy, in saying that I should take Ar¬ 
gos. I fear me thy oracle has now got its ac¬ 
complishment.” I 

8r. Cleomenes now sent home the greater j 
part of his army, while with a thousand of his 
best troops he proceeded to the temple of Juno, ‘ 
to offer sacrifice. When however he would 
have slain the victim on the altar himself, the 
priest forbade him, as it was not lawful (he 
said) for a foreigner to sacrifice in that temple. 

At this Cleomenes ordered his helots to drag i 
the priest from the altar and scourge him, 
while he performed the sacrifice himself, after 
which he went back to Sparta. 

82. Thereupon his enemies brought him up 
before the Ephors, and made it a charge 
against him that he had allowed himself to be 
bribed, and on that account had not taken Ar- , 
gos when he might have captured it easily. To < 
this he answered—whether truly or falsely I | 
cannot say with certainty—but at any rate his i 
answer to the charge was that “so soon as he I 
discovered the sacred precinct which he had I 
taken to belong to Argos, he directly imagined ’ 






77 -86] THE HISTORY 201 


that the oracle had received its accomplish¬ 
ment; he therefore thought it not good to at¬ 
tempt the town, at the least until he had in¬ 
quired by sacrifice, and ascertained if the god 
meant to grant him the place, or was deter¬ 
mined to oppose his taking it. So he offered in 
the temple of Juno, and when the omens were 
propitious, immediately there flashed forth a 
flame of fire from the breast of the image; 
whereby he knew of a surety that he was not 
to take Argos. For if the flash had come from 
the head, he would have gained the town, cit¬ 
adel and all; but as it shone from the breast, he 
had done so much as the god intended.” And 
his words seemed to the Spartans so true and 
reasonable, that he came clear off from his ad¬ 
versaries. 

83. Argos however was left so bare of men 
that the slaves managed the state, filled the 
offices, and administered everything until the 
sons of those who were slain by Cleomenes 
grew up. Then these latter cast out the slaves, 
and got the city back under their own rule; 
while the slaves who had been driven out 
fought a battle and won Tiryns. After this for 
a time there was peace between the two; but 
a certain man, a soothsayer, named Oleander, 
who was by race a Phigalean from Arcadia, 
joined himself to the slaves, and stirred them 
up to make a fresh attack upon their lords. 
Then were they at war with one another by the 
space of many years; but at length the Argives 
with much trouble gained the upper hand. 

84. The Argives say that Cleomenes lost his 
senses, and died so miserably, on account of 
these doings. But his own countrymen declare 
that his madness proceeded not from any su¬ 
pernatural cause whatever, but only from the 
habit of drinking wine unmixed with water, 
which he learnt of the Scyths. These nomads, 
from the time that Darius made his inroad into 
their country, had always had a wish for re¬ 
venge. They therefore sent ambassadors to 
Sparta to conclude a league, proposing to en¬ 
deavour themselves to enter Media by the 
Phasis, while the Spartans should march in¬ 
land from Ephesus, and then the two armies 
should join together in one. When the Scyths 

I came to Sparta on this errand Cleomenes was 
with them continually; and growing some- 

1 what too familiar, learnt of them to drink his 

i wine without water, a practice which is 
thought by the Spartans to have caused his 
madness. From this distance of time the Spar¬ 
tans, according to their own account, have been 

I accustomed, when they want to drink purer 

i 


wine than common, to give the order to fill 
“Scythian fashion.” The Spartans then speak 
thus concerning Cleomenes; but for my own 
part I think his death was a judgment on him 
for wronging Demaratus. 

85. No sooner did the news of Cleomenes’ 
death reach Egina than straightway the Egine- 
tans sent ambassadors to Sparta to complain 
of the conduct of Leotychides in respect of 
their hostages, who were still kept at Athens. 
So they of Lacedaemon assembled a court of 
justice and gave sentence upon Leotychides, 
that whereas he had grossly affronted the peo¬ 
ple of Egina, he should be given up to the am¬ 
bassadors, to be led away in place of the men 
whom the Athenians had in their keeping. 
Then the ambassadors were about to lead him 
away; but Theasides, the son of Leoprepes, 
who was a man greatly esteemed in Sparta, 
interfered, and said to them:— 

“What are ye minded to do, ye men of Egi¬ 
na? To lead away captive the king of the Spar¬ 
tans, whom his countrymen have given into 
your hands? Though now in their anger they 
have passed this sentence, yet belike the time 
will come when they will punish you, if you 
act thus, by bringing utter destruction upon 
your country.” 

The Eginetans, when they heard this, 
changed their plan, and, instead of leading 
Leotychides away captive, agreed with him 
that he should come with them to Athens, and 
give them back their men. 

86. When however he reached that city, and 
demanded the restoration of his pledge, the 
Athenians, being unwilling to comply, pro¬ 
ceeded to make excuses, saying “that two 
kings had come and left the men with them, 
and they did not think it right to give them 
back to the one without the other.” So when 
the Athenians refused plainly to restore the 
men, Leotychides said to them:— 

“Men of Athens, act which way you choose 
—give me up the hostages, and be righteous, 
or keep them, and be the contrary. I wish, 
however, to tell you what happened once in 
Sparta about a pledge. The story goes among 
us that three generations back there lived in 
Lacedaemon one Glaucus, the son of Epicydes, 
a ma-n who in every other respect was on a 
par with the first in the kingdom, and whose 
character for justice was such as to place him 
above all the other Spartans. Now to this man 
at the appointed season the following events 
happened. A certain Milesian came to Sparta 
and, having desired to speak with him, said— 




202 HERODOTUS [ Book vi 


‘I am of Miletus, and I have come hither, Glau- 
cus, in the hope of profiting by thy honesty. 
For when I heard much talk thereof in Ionia 
and through all the rest of Greece, and when 
I observed that whereas Ionia is always inse¬ 
cure, the Peloponnese stands firm and un¬ 
shaken, and noted likewise how wealth is con¬ 
tinually changing hands in our country, I took 
counsel with myself and resolved to turn one- 
half of my substance into money, and place it 
in thy hands, since I am well assured that it 
will be safe in thy keeping. Here then is the 
silver—take it—and take likewise these tallies, 
and be careful of them; remember thou art to 
give back the money to the person who shall 
bring you their fellows.’ Such were the words 
of the Milesian stranger; and Glaucus took the 
deposit on the terms expressed to him. Many 
years had gone by when the sons of the man by 
whom the money was left came to Sparta, and 
had an interview with Glaucus, whereat they 
produced the tallies, and asked to have the 
money returned to them. But Glaucus sought 
to refuse, and answered them: ‘I have no recol¬ 
lection of the matter; nor can I bring to mind 
any of those particulars whereof ye speak. 
When I remember, I will certainly do what is 
just. If I had the money, you have a right to re¬ 
ceive it back; but if it was never given to me, I 
shall put the Greek law in force against you. 
For the present I give you no answer; but four 
months hence I will settle the business.’ So the 
Milesians went away sorrowful, considering 
that their money was utterly lost to them. As 
for Glaucus, he made a journey to Delphi, and 
there consulted the oracle. To his question if 
he should swear, and so make prize of the 
money, the Pythoness returned for answer 
these lines following:— 

Best for the present it were, O Glaucus, to do as 
thou wishest. 

Swearing an oath to prevail, and so to niahje prize 
of the money. 

Swear then—death is the lot e*en of those who 
never swear falsely. 

Yet hath the Oath-God a son who is nameless, 
footless, and handless: 

Mighty in strength he approaches to vengeance, 
and whelms in destruction 
All who belong to the race, or the house of the 
man who is perjured. 

But oath-\eeping men leave behind them a flour¬ 
ishing offspring. 

Glaucus when he heard these words earnestly 
besought the god to pardon his question; but 
the Pythoness replied that it was as bad to have 


tempted the god as it would have been to have 
done the deed. Glaucus, however, sent for the 
Milesian strangers, and gave them back their 
money. And now I will tell you, Athenians, 
what my purpose has been in recounting to j 
you this history. Glaucus at the present time 1 
has not a single descendant; nor is there any 
family known as his—root and branch has he 
been removed from Sparta. It is a good thing, 
therefore, when a pledge has been left with 
one, not even in thought to doubt about re¬ 
storing it.” 

Thus spake Leotychides; but, as he found 
that the Athenians would not hearken to him, 
he left them and went his way. 

87. The Eginetans had never been punished 
for the wrongs which, to pleasure the Thebans, 
they had committed upon Athens. Now, how¬ 
ever, conceiving that they were themselves 
wronged, and had a fair ground of complaint 
against the Athenians, they instantly prepared 
to revenge themselves. As it chanced that the 
Athenian theoris, which was a vessel of five 
banks of oars, lay at Sunium, the Eginetans 
contrived an ambush, and made themselves 
masters of the holy vessel, on board of which 
were a number of Athenians of the highest 
rank, whom they took and threw into prison. 

88. At this outrage the Athenians no longer 
delayed, but set to work to scheme their worst 
against the Eginetans; and, as there was in 
Egina at that time a man of mark, Nicodrom- 
us by name, the son of Cnoethus, who was on 
ill terms with his countrymen because on a 
former occasion they had driven him into ban¬ 
ishment, they listened to overtures from this 
man, who had heard how determined they 
were to do the Eginetans a mischief, and 
agreed with him that on a certain day he 
should be ready to betray the island into their 
hands, and they would come with a body of 
troops to his assistance. And Nicodromus, 
some time after, holding to the agreement, 
made himself master of what is called the old 
town. 

89. The Athenians, however, did not come 

to the day; for their own fleet was not of force \ 
sufficient to engage the Eginetans, and while 
they were begging the Corinthians to lend ^ 
them some ships, the failure of the enterprise 
took place. In those days the Corinthians were 
on the best of terms with the Athenians; and 
accordingly they now yielded to their request, 
and furnished them with twenty ships; but, as tk 
their law did not allow the ships to be given 
for nothing, they sold them to the Athenians 




87 - 95 ] the history 203 


for five drachms apiece. As soon then as the 
Athenians had obtained this aid, and, by man¬ 
ning also their own ships, had equipped a fleet 
of seventy sail, they crossed over to Egina, but 
arrived a day later than the time agreed upon. 

90. Meanwhile Nicodromus, when he found 
the Athenians did not come to the time ap¬ 
pointed, took ship and made his escape from 
the island. The Eginetans who accompanied 
him were settled by the Athenians at Sunium, 
whence they were wont to issue forth and 
plunder the Eginetans of the island. But this 
took place at a later date. 

91. When the wealthier Eginetans had thus 
obtained the victory over the common people 
who had revolted with Nicodromus, they laid 
hands on a certain number of them, and led 
them out to death. But here they were guilty 
of a sacrilege, which, notwithstanding all their 
efforts, they were never able to atone, being 
driven from the island before they had ap¬ 
peased the goddess whom they now provoked. 
Seven hundred of the common people had fall¬ 
en alive into their hands; and they were all 
being led out to death, when one of them es¬ 
caped from his chains, and flying to the gate¬ 
way of the temple of Ceres the Lawgiver, laid 
hold of the door-handles, and clung to them. 
The others sought to drag him from his ref¬ 
uge; but, finding themselves unable to tear 
him away, they cut off his hands, and so took 
him, leaving the hands still tightly grasping 
the handles. 

92. Such were the doings of the Eginetans 
among themselves. When the Athenians ar¬ 
rived, they went out to meet them with seven¬ 
ty ships; and a battle took place, wherein the 
Eginetans suffered a defeat. Hereupon they 
had recourse again to their old allies, the Ar- 
gives; but these latter refused now to lend 
them any aid, being angry because some Egin- 
etan ships, which Cleomenes had taken by 
force, accompanied him in his invasion of 

1 Argolis, and joined in the disembarkation. The 
same thing had happened at the same time 
with certain vessels of the Sicyonians; and the 
Argives had laid a fine of a thousand talents 
upon the misdoers, five hundred upon each: 
whereupon they of Sicyon acknowledged 

I themselves to have sinned, and agreed with 
the Argives to pay them a hundred talents, and 
so be quit of the debt; but the Eginetans would 
make no acknowledgment at all, and showed 
themselves proud and stiff-necked. For this 
reason, when they now prayed the Argives for 
aid, the state refused to send them a single 


soldier. Notwithstanding, volunteers joined 
them from Argos to the number of a thousand, 
under a captain, Eurybates, a man skilled in 
the pentathlic contests. Of these men the great¬ 
er part never returned, but were slain by the 
Athenians in Egina. Eurybates, their captain, 
fought a number of single combats, and, after 
killing three men in this way, was himself 
slain by the fourth, who was a Decelean, 
named Sophanes. 

93. Afterwards the Eginetans fell upon the 
Athenian fleet when it was in some disorder and 
beat it, capturing four ships with their crews. 

94. Thus did war rage between the Egine¬ 
tans and Athenians. Meantime the Persian 
pursued his own design, from day to day ex¬ 
horted by his servant to “remember the Athen¬ 
ians,” and likewise urged continually by the 
Pisistratidae, who were ever accusing their 
countrymen. Moreover it pleased him well to 
have a pretext for carrying war into Greece, 
that so he might reduce all those who had re¬ 
fused to give him earth and water. As for Mar- 
donius, since his expedition had succeeded so 
ill, Darius took the command of the troops 
from him, and appointed other generals in his 
stead, who were to lead the host against Ere- 
tria and Athens; to wit, Datis, who was by 
descent a Mede, and Artaphernes, the son of 
Artaphernes, his own nephew. These men re¬ 
ceived orders to carry Athens and Eretria 
away captive, and to bring the prisoners into 
his presence. 

95. So the new commanders took their de¬ 
parture from the court and went down to Ci¬ 
licia, to the Aleian plain, having with them a 
numerous and well-appointed land army. En¬ 
camping here, they were joined by the sea force 
which had been required of the several states, 
and at the same time by the horse-transports 
which Darius had, the year before, command¬ 
ed his tributaries to make ready. Aboard these 
the horses were embarked; and the troops 
were received by the ships of war; after which 
the whole fleet, amounting in all to six hun¬ 
dred triremes, made sail for Ionia. Thence, in¬ 
stead of proceeding with a straight course 
along the shore to the Hellespont and to 
Thrace, they loosed from Samos and voyaged 
across the Icarian sea through the midst of the 
islands; mainly, as I believe, because they 
feared the danger of doubling Mount Athos, 
where the year before they had suffered so 
grievously on their passage; but a constraining 
cause also was their former failure to take 
Naxos. 



204 HERODOTUS [Book vi 


96. When the Persians, therefore, approach¬ 
ing from the Icarian Sea, cast anchor at Naxos, 
which, recollecting what there befell them 
formerly, they had determined to attack be¬ 
fore any other state, the Naxians, instead of 
encountering them, took to flight, and hurried 
od to the hills. The Persians however succeed¬ 
ed in laying hands on some, and them they 
carried away captive, while at the same time 
they burnt all the temples together with the 
town. This done, they left Naxos, and sailed 
away to the other islands. 

97. While the Persians were thus employed, 
the Delians likewise quitted Delos, and took 
refuge in Tenos. And now the expedition drew 
near, when Datis sailed forward in advance of 
the other ships; commanding them, instead of 
anchoring at Delos, to rendezvous at Rhenea, 
over against Delos, while he himself proceeded 
to discover whither the Delians had fled; after 
which he sent a herald to them with this mes¬ 
sage:— 

“Why are ye fled, O holy men.^ Why have 
ye judged me so harshly and so wrongfully.^ I 
have surely sense enough, even had not the 
king so ordered, to spare the country which 
gave birth to the two gods—to spare, I say, 
both the country and its inhabitants. Come 
back therefore to your dwellings; and once 
more inhabit your island.” 

Such was the message which Datis sent by 
his herald to the Delians. He likewise placed 
upon the altar three hundred talents’ weight 
of frankincense, and offered it. 

98. After this he sailed with his whole host 
against Eretria, taking with him both lonians 
and iEolians. When he was departed, Delos 
(as the Delians told me) was shaken by an 
earthquake, the first and last shock that has 
been felt to this day. And truly this was a 
prodigy whereby the god warned men of the 
evils that were coming upon them. For in the 
three following generations of Darius the son 
of Hystaspes, Xerxes the son of Darius, and 
Artaxerxes the son of Xerxes, more woes befell 
Greece than in the twenty generations preced¬ 
ing Darius—woes caused in part by the Per¬ 
sians, but in part arising from the contentions 
among their own chief men respecting the su¬ 
preme power. Wherefore it is not surprising 
that Delos, though it had never before been 
shaken, should at that time have felt the shock 
of an earthquake. And indeed there was an 
oracle, which said of Delos— 

Delos* self will I shake, which never yet has been 

shaken. 


Of the above names Darius may be rendered 
“Worker,” Xerxes “Warrior,” and Artaxerxes 
“Great Warrior.” And so might we call these 
kings in our own language with propriety. 

99. The barbarians, after loosing from De¬ 
los, proceeded to touch at the other islands, 
and took troops from each, and likewise car¬ 
ried off a number of the children as hostages. 
Going thus from one to another, they came at 
last to Carystus; but here the hostages were 
refused by the Carystians, who said they 
would neither give any, nor consent to bear 
arms against the cities of their neighbours, 
meaning Athens and Eretria. Hereupon the 
Persians laid siege to Carystus, and wasted the 
country round, until at length the inhabitants 
were brought over and agreed to do what was 
required of them. 

100. Meanwhile the Eretrians, understand¬ 
ing that the Persian armament was coming 
against them, besought the Athenians for as¬ 
sistance. Nor did the Athenians refuse their 
aid, but assigned to them as auxiliaries the 
four thousand landholders to whom they had 
allotted the estates of the Chalcidean Hippo- 
batae. At Eretria, however, things were in no 
healthy state; for though they had called in the 
aid of the Athenians, yet they were not agreed 
among themselves how they should act; some 
of them were minded to leave the city and to 
take refuge in the heights of Eubcra, while 
others, who looked to receiving a reward from 
the Persians, were making ready to betray 
their country. So when these things came to 
the ears of Tlschines, the son of Nothon, one 
of the first men in Eretria, he made known the 
whole state of affairs to the Athenians who 
were already arrived, and besought them to re¬ 
turn home to their own land, and not perish 
with his countrymen. And the Athenians 
hearkened to his counsel, and, crossing over to 
Oropus, in this way escaped the danger. 

101. The Persian fleet now drew near and 
anchored at Tamynae, Choereae, and iEgilia, 
three places in the territory of Eretria. Once 
masters of these posts, they proceeded forth¬ 
with to disembark their horses, and made 
ready to attack the enemy. But the Eretrians 
were not minded to sally forth and offer battle; 
their only care, after it had been resolved not 
to quit the city, was, if possible, to defend their 
walls. And now the fortress was assaulted in 
good earnest, and for six days there fell on 
both sides vast numbers, but on the seventh 
day Euphorbus, the son of Alcimachus, and 
Philagrus, the son of Cyneas, who were both 




96 - 107 ] THE HISTORY 205 


citizens of good repute, betrayed the place to 
the Persians. These were no sooner entered 
within the walls than they plundered and 
burnt all the temples that there were in the 
town, in revenge for the burning of their own 
temples at Sardis; moreover, they did accord¬ 
ing to the orders of Darius, and carried away 
captive all the inhabitants. 

102. The Persians, having thus brought Er- 
etria into subjection after waiting a few days, 
made sail for Attica, greatly straitening the 
Athenians as they approached, and thinking 
to deal with them as they had dealt with the 
people of Eretria. And, because there was no 
place in all Attica so convenient for their horse 
as Marathon, and it lay moreover quite close 
to Eretria, therefore Hippias, the son of Pisis- 
tratus, conducted them thither. 

103. When intelligence of this reached the 
Athenians, they likewise marched their troops 
to Marathon, and there stood on the defensive, 
having at their head ten generals, of whom one 
was Miltiades. 

Now this man’s father, Cimon, the son of 
Stesagoras, was banished from Athens by Pisis- 
tratus, the son of Hippocrates. In his banish¬ 
ment it was his fortune to win the four-horse 
chariot-race at Olympia, whereby he gained 
the very same honour which had before been 
carried off by Miltiades, his half-brother on the 
mother’s side. At the next Olympiad he won 
the prize again with the same mares; upon 
which he caused Pisistratus to be proclaimed 
the winner, having made an agreement with 
him that on yielding him this honour he 
should be allowed to come back to his country. 
Afterwards, still with the same mares, he won 
the prize a third time; whereupon he was put 
to death by the sons of Pisistratus, whose father 
was no longer living. They set men to lie in 
wait for him secretly; and these men slew him 
near the government-house in the night-time. 
He was buried outside the city, beyond what is 
called the Valley Road; and right opposite his 
tomb were buried the mares which had won 
the three prizes. The same success had like¬ 
wise been achieved once previously, to wit, by 
the mares of Evagoras the Lacedaemonian, but 
never except by them. At the time of Cimon’s 
death Stesagoras, the elder of his two sons, 
was in the Chersonese, where he lived with 
Miltiades his uncle; the younger, who was 
called Miltiades after the founder of the 
Chersonesite colony, was with his father in 
Athens. 

104. It was this Miltiades who now com¬ 


manded the Athenians, after escaping from 
the Chersonese, and twice nearly losing his life. 
First he was chased as far as Imbrus by the 
Phoenicians, who had a great desire to take 
him and carry him up to the king; and when 
he had avoided this danger, and, having 
reached his own country, thought himself to 
be altogether in safety, he found his enemies 
waiting for him, and was cited by them before 
a court and impeached for his tyranny in the 
Chersonese. But he came off victorious here 
likewise, and was thereupon made general of 
the Athenians by the free choice of the people. 

105. And first, before they left the city, the 
generals sent off to Sparta a herald, one Phei- 
dippides, who was by birth an Athenian, and 
by profession and practice a trained runner. 
This man, according to the account which he 
gave to the Athenians on his return, when he 
was near Mount Parthenium, above Tegea, 
fell in with the god Pan, who called him by his 
name, and bade him ask the Athenians 
“wherefore they neglected him so entirely, 
when he was kindly disposed towards them, 
and had often helped them in times past, and 
would do so again in time to come.^” The 
Athenians, entirely believing in the truth of 
this report, as soon as their affairs were once 
more in good order, set up a temple to Pan 
under the Acropolis, and, in return for the 
message which I have recorded, established in 
his honour yearly sacrifices and a torch-race. 

106. On the occasion of which we speak 
when Pheidippides was sent by the Athenian 
generals, and, according to his own account, 
saw Pan on his journey, he reached Sparta on 
the very next day after quitting the city of 
Athens. Upon his arrival he went before the 
rulers, and said to them:— 

“Men of Lacedxmon, the Athenians beseech 
you to hasten to their aid, and not allow that 
state, which is the most ancient in all Greece, 
to be enslaved by the barbarians. Eretria, look 
you, is already carried away captive; and 
Greece weakened by the loss of no mean city.” 

Thus did Pheidippides deliver the message 
committed to him. And the Spartans wished to 
help the Athenians, but were unable to give 
them any present succour, as they did not like 
to break their established law. It was then the 
ninth day of the first decade; and they could 
not march out of Sparta on the ninth, when 
the moon had not reached the full. So they 
waited for the full of the moon. 

107. The barbarians were conducted to Mar¬ 
athon by Hippias, the son of Pisistratus, who 



206 HERODOTUS [Rook vi 


the night before had seen a strange vision in 
his sleep. He dreamt of lying in his mother’s 
arms, and conjectured the dream to mean that 
he would he restored to Athens, recover the 
power which he had lost, and afterwards live 
to a good old age in his native country. Such 
was the sense in which he interpreted the vi¬ 
sion. He now proceeded to act as guide to the 
Persians; and, in the first place, he landed the 
prisoners taken from Eretria upon the island 
that is called iEgileia, a tract belonging to the 
Styreans, after which he brought the fleet to 
anchor off Marathon, and marshalled the 
bands of the barbarians as they disembarked. 
As he was thus employed it chanced that he 
sneezed and at the same time coughed with 
more violence than was his wont. Now, as he 
was a man advanced in years, and the greater 
number of his teeth were loose, it so happened 
that one of them was driven out with the force 
of the cough, and fell down into the sand. Hip- 
pias took all the pains he could to find it; but 
the tooth was nowhere to be seen: whereupon 
he fetched a deep sigh, and said to the bystand¬ 
ers:— 

“After all, the land is not ours; and we shall 
never be able to bring it under. All my share 
in it is the portion of which my tooth has pos¬ 
session.” 

So Hippias believed that in this way his 
dream was fulfilled. 

io8. The Athenians were drawn up in or¬ 
der of battle in a sacred close belonging to 
Hercules, when they were joined by the Platae- 
ans, who came in full force to their aid. Some 
time before, the Plataeans had put themselves 
under the rule of the Athenians; and these last 
had already undertaken many labours on their 
behalf. The occasion of the surrender was the 
following. The Plataeans suffered grievous 
things at the hands of the men of Thebes; so, 
as it chanced that Cleomenes, the son of Anax- 
andridas, and the Lacedarmonians were in 
their neighbourhood, they first of all offered to 
surrender themselves to them. But the Lacedae¬ 
monians refused to receive them, and said:— 

“We dwell too far off from you, and ours 
would be but chill succour. Ye might often¬ 
times be carried into slavery before one of us 
heard of it. We counsel you rather to give your¬ 
selves up to the Athenians, who are your next 
neighbours, and well able to shelter you.” 

This they said, not so much out of good will 
towards the Plataeans as because they wished 
to involve the Athenians in trouble by engag¬ 
ing them in wars with the Boeotians. The Pla¬ 


taeans, however, when the Lacedaemonians 
gave them this counsel, complied at once; and 
when the sacrifice to the Twelve Gods was be¬ 
ing offered at Athens, they came and sat as 
suppliants about the altar, and gave themselves 
up to the Athenians. The Thebans no sooner 
learnt what the Plataeans had done than in¬ 
stantly they marched out against them, while 
the Athenians sent troops to their aid. As the 
two armies were about to join battle, the Cor¬ 
inthians, who chanced to be at hand, would 
not allow them to engage; both sides consented 
to take them for arbitrators, whereupon they 
made up the quarrel, and fixed the boundary¬ 
line between the two states upon this condi¬ 
tion: to wit, that if any of the Boeotians wished 
no longer to belong to Boeotia, the Thebans 
should allow them to follow their own incli¬ 
nations. The Corinthians, when they had thus 
decreed, forthwith departed to their homes: 
the Athenians likewise set off on their return; 
but the Boeotians fell upon them during the 
march, and a battle was fought wherein they 
were worsted by the Athenians. Hereupon 
these last would not be bound by the line 
which the Corinthians had fixed, but advanced 
beyond those limits, and made the Asopus the 
boundary-line between the country of the The¬ 
bans and that of the Plataeans. and Hysians. 
Under such circumstances did the Plataeans 
give themselves up to Athens; and now they 
were come to Marathon to bear the Athenians 
aid. 

109. The Athenian generals were divided 
in their opinions; and some advised not to risk 
a battle, because they were too few to engage 
such a host as that of the Medes, while others 
were for fighting at once; and among these 
last was Miltiades. He therefore, seeing that 
opinions were thus divided, and that the less 
worthy counsel appeared likely to prevail, re¬ 
solved to go to the Polemarch, and have a con¬ 
ference with him. For the man on whom the 
lot fell to be Polemarch at Athens was entitled 
to give his vote with the ten generals, since 
anciently the Athenians allowed him an equal 
right of voting with them. The Polemarch at 
this juncture was Callimachus of Aphidnae; to 
him therefore Miltiades went, and said:— 

“With thee it rests, Callimachus, either to 
bring Athens to slavery, or, by securing her 
freedom, to leave behind thee to all future gen¬ 
erations a memory beyond even Harmodius 
and Aristogeiton. For never since the time that 
the Athenians became a people were they in 
so great a danger as now. If they bow their 





108 - 115 ] THE HISTORY 207 


necks beneath the yoke of the Mecles, the woes 
which they will have to suffer when given into 
the power of Hippias are already determined 
on; if, on the other hand, they fight and over¬ 
come, Athens may rise to be the very first city 
in Greece. How it comes to pass that these 
things are likely to happen, and how the de¬ 
termining of them in some sort rests with thee, 

I will now proceed to make clear. We gener¬ 
als are ten in number, and our votes are di¬ 
vided; half of us wish to engage, half to avoid 
a combat. Now, if we do not fight, I look to 
see a great disturbance at Athens which will 
shake men’s resolutions, and then I fear they 
will submit themselves; but if we fight the bat¬ 
tle before any unsoundness show itself among 
our citizens, let the gods but give us fair play, 
and we are well able to overcome the enemy. 
On thee therefore we depend in this matter, 
which lies wholly in thine own power. Thou 
hast only to add thy vote to my side and thy 
country will be free, and not free only, but the 
first state in Greece. Or, if thou preferrest to 
give thy vote to them who would decline the 
combat, then the reverse will follow.” 

no. Miltiades by these words gained Calli¬ 
machus; and the addition of the Polemarch’s 
vote caused the decision to be in favour of 
fighting. Hereupon all those generals who had 
been desirous of hazarding a battle, when their 
turn came to command the army, gave up 
their right to Miltiades. He however, though 
he accepted their offers, nevertheless waited, 
and would not fight until his own day of com¬ 
mand arrived in due course. 

III. Then at length, when his own turn was 
come, the Athenian battle was set in array, and 
this was the order of it. Callimachus the Pole- 
march led the right wing; for it was at that 
time a rule with the Athenians to give the 
right wing to the Polemarch. After this fol¬ 
lowed the tribes, according as they were num¬ 
bered, in an unbroken line; while last of all 
came the Plataeans, forming the left wing. And 
ever since that day it has been a custom with 
the Athenians, in the sacrifices and assemblies 
held each fifth year at Athens, for the Atheni¬ 
an herald to implore the blessing of the gods 
on the Plataeans conjointly with the Atheni¬ 
ans. Now, as they marshalled the host upon the 
field of Marathon, in order that the Athenian 
front might be of equal length with the Medi¬ 
an, the ranks of the centre were diminished, 
and it became the weakest part of the line, 
while the wings were both made strong with 
a depth of many ranks. 


112. So when the battle was set in array, 
and the victims showed themselves favourable, 
instantly the Athenians, so soon as they were 
let go, charged the barbarians at a run. Now 
the distance between the two armies was little 
short of eight furlongs. The Persians, there¬ 
fore, when they saw the Greeks coming on at 
speed, made ready to receive them, although it 
seemed to them that the Athenians were bereft 
of their senses, and bent upon their own de¬ 
struction; for they saw a mere handful of men 
coming on at a run without either horsemen 
or archers. Such was the opinion of the bar¬ 
barians; but the Athenians in close array fell 
upon them, and fought in a manner worthy of 
being recorded. They were the first of the 
Greeks, so far as I know, who introduced the 
custom of charging the enemy at a run, and 
they were likewise the first who dared to look 
upon the Median garb, and to face men clad 
in that fashion. Until this time the very name 
of the Medes had been a terror to the Greeks 
to hear. 

113. The two armies fought together on the 
plain of Marathon for a length of time; and in 
the mid battle, where the Persians themselves 
and the Sacae had their place, the barbarians 
were victorious, and broke and pursued the 
Greeks into the inner country; but on the two 
wings the Athenians and the Plataeans defeated 
the enemy. Having so done, they suffered the 
routed barbarians to fly at their ease, and join¬ 
ing the two wings in one, fell upon those who 
had broken their own centre, and fought and 
conquered them. These likewise fled, and now 
the Athenians hung upon the runaways and 
cut them down, chasing them all the way to 
the shore, on reaching which they laid hold of 
the ships and called aloud for fire. 

114. It was in the struggle here that Calli¬ 
machus the Polemarch, after greatly distin¬ 
guishing himself, lost his life; Stesilaiis too, the 
son of Thrasilaiis, one of the generals, was 
slain; and Cynaegirus, the son of Euphorion, 
having seized on a vessel of the enemy’s by the 
ornament at the stern, had his hand cut off by 
the blow of an axe, and so perished; as like¬ 
wise did many other Athenians of note and 
name. 

115,. Nevertheless the Athenians secured in 
this way seven of the vessels; while with the re¬ 
mainder the barbarians pushed off, and taking 
aboard their Eretrian prisoners from the island 
where they had left them, doubled Cape Suni- 
um, hoping to reach Athens before the return 
of the Athenians. The Alcmcxonidae were ac- 


208 HERODOTUS [Book vi 


cused by their countrymen of suggesting this 
course to them; they had, it was said, an un¬ 
derstanding with the Persians, and made a sig¬ 
nal to them, by raising a shield, after they were 
embarked in their ships. 

116. The Persians accordingly sailed round 
Sunium. But the Athenians with all possible 
speed marched away to the defence of their 
city, and succeeded in reaching Athens before 
the appearance of the barbarians: and as their 
camp at Marathon had been pitched in a pre¬ 
cinct of Hercules, so now they encamped in an¬ 
other precinct of the same god at Cynosarges. 
The barbarian fleet arrived, and lay to of^ 
Phalerum, which was at that time the haven of 
Athens; but after resting awhile upon their 
oars, they departed and sailed away to Asia. 

117. There fell in this battle of Marathon, 
on the side of the barbarians, about six thou¬ 
sand and four hundred men; on that of the 
Athenians, one hundred and ninety-two. Such 
was the number of the slain on the one side and 
the other. A strange prodigy likewise hap¬ 
pened at this fight. Epizelus, the son of Cuph- 
agoras, an Athenian, was in the thick of the 
fray, and behaving himself as a brave man 
should, when suddenly he was stricken with 
blindness, without blow of sword or dart; and 
this blindness continued thenceforth during 
the whole of his after life. The following is the 
account which he himself, as I have heard, 
gave of the matter: he said that a gigantic war¬ 
rior, with a huge beard, which shaded all his 
shield, stood over against him; but the ghostly 
semblance passed him by, and slew the man at 
his side. Such, as I understand, was the tale 
which Epizelus told. 

118. Datis meanwhile was on his way back 
to Asia, and had reached Myconus, when he 
saw in his sleep a vision. What it was is not 
known; but no sooner was day come than he 
caused strict search to be made throughout the 
whole fleet, and finding on board a Phoenician 
vessel an image of Apollo overlaid with gold, 
he inquired from whence it had been taken, 
and learning to what temple it belonged, he 
took it with him in his own ship to Delos, and 
placed it in the temple there, enjoining the 
Delians, who had now come back to their is¬ 
land, to restore the image to the Theban Deli- 
um, which lies on the coast over against Chal- 
cis. Having left these injunctions, he sailed 
away; but the Delians failed to restore the stat¬ 
ue; and it was not till twenty years afterwards 
that the Thebans, warned by an oracle, them¬ 
selves brought it back to Delium. 


119. As for the Eretrians, whom Datis and 
Artaphernes had carried away captive, when 
the fleet reached Asia, they were taken up to 
Susa. Now King Darius, before they were 
made his prisoners, nourished a fierce anger ■ 
against these men for having injured him 
without provocation; but now that he saw 
them brought into his presence, and become 
his subjects, he did them no other harm, but 
only settled them at one of his own stations in 
Cissia—a place called Ardericca—two hun¬ 
dred and ten furlongs distant from Susa, and 
forty from the well which yields produce of 
three different kinds. For from this well they ■ 
get bitumen, salt, and oil, procuring it in the . 
way that I will now describe: they draw with 

a swipe, and instead of a bucket make use of 
the half of a wine-skin; with this the man dips, 
and after drawing, pours the liquid into a j 
reservoir, wherefrom it passes into another, i 
and there takes three different shapes. The salt I 
and the bitumen forthwith collect and harden, 
while the oil is drawn off into casks. It is called 
by the Persians “rhadinace,” is black, and has f 
an unpleasant smell. Here then King Darius 
established the Eretrians; and here they con¬ 
tinued to my time, and still spoke their old 
language. So thus it fared with the Eretrians. 

120. After the full of the moon two thou- . 
sand Lacedaemonians came to Athens. So eager 
had they been to arrive in time, that they took 
but three days to reach Attica from Sparta. 
They came, however, too late for the battle; 
yet, as they had a longing to behold the Medes, 
they continued their march to Marathon and 
there viewed the slain. Then, after giving the 
Athenians all praise for their achievement, they 
departed and returned home. 

121. But it fills me with wonderment, and 
I can in no wise believe the report, that the 
Alcmseonidae had an understanding with the 
Persians, and held them up a shield as a signal, 
wishing Athens to be brought under the yoke 
of the barbarians and of Hippias—the Alcma:- 
onidae, who have shown themselves at least as 
bitter haters of tyrants as was Callias, the son 
of Phaenippus, and father of Hipponicus. This 
Callias was the only person at Athens who, 
when the Pisistratidae were driven out, and 
their goods were exposed for sale by the vote 
of the people, had the courage to make pur¬ 
chases, and likewise in many other ways to 
display the strongest hostility. 

122. He was a man very worthy to be bad in 
remembrance by all, on several accounts. For 
not only did he thus distinguish himself be- ^ 




116-127] THE HISTORY 209 


yond others in the cause of his country’s free¬ 
dom; but likewise, by the honours which he 
gained at the Olympic Games, where he car¬ 
ried off the prize in the horse-race, and was 
second in the four-horse chariot-race, and by 
his victory at an earlier period in the Pythian 
Games, he showed himself in the eyes of all the 
Greeks a man most unsparing in his expendi¬ 
ture. He was remarkable too for his conduct 
in respect of his daughters, three in number; 
for when they came to be of marriageable age, 
he gave to each of them a most ample dowry, 
and placed it at their own disposal, allowing 
them to choose their husbands from among all 
the citizens of Athens, and giving each in mar¬ 
riage to the man of her own choice.^ 

123. Now the Alcmaeonidae fell not a whit 
short of this person in their hatred of tyrants, 
so that I am astonished at the charge made 
against them, and cannot bring myself to be¬ 
lieve that they held up a shield; for they were 
men who had remained in exile during the 
whole time that the tyranny lasted, and they 
even contrived the trick by which the Pisistra- 
tidae were deprived of their throne. Indeed I 
look upon them as the persons who in good 
truth gave Athens her freedom far more than 
Harmodius and Aristogeiton. For these last 
did but exasperate the other Pisistratidae by 
slaying Hipparchus, and were far from doing 
anything towards putting down the tyranny; 
whereas the Alcmaeonidae were manifestly the 
actual deliverers of Athens, if at least it be 
true that the Pythoness was prevailed upon 
by them to bid the Lacedaemonians set Athens 
free, as I have already related. 

124. But perhaps they were offended with 
the people of Athens; and therefore betrayed 
their country. Nay, but on the contrary there 
were none of the Athenians who were held in 
such general esteem, or who were so laden 
with honours. So that it is not even reasonable 
to suppose that a shield was held up by them 
on this account. A shield was shown, no doubt; 
that cannot be gainsaid; but who it was that 

, showed it I cannot any further determine. 

125. Now the Alcmaeonidae were, even in 

t days of yore, a family of note at Athens; but 

from the time of Alcmaeon, and again of Meg- 
acles, they rose to special eminence. The form¬ 
er of these two personages, to wit, Alcmaeon, 
the son of Megacles, when Crcesus the Lydian 
sent men from Sardis to consult the Delphic 

^ This chapter is generally regarded as an in¬ 
terpolation. It is wanting in several of the best 
MSS. 


oracle, gave aid gladly to his messengers, and 
assisted them to accomplish their task. Croesus, 
informed of Alcmaeon’s kindnesses by the 
Lydians who from time to time conveyed his 
messages to the god, sent for him to Sardis, 
and when he arrived, made him a present of 
as much gold as he should be able to carry at 
one time about his person. Finding that this 
was the gift assigned him, Alcmaeon took his 
measures, and prepared himself to receive it 
in the following way. He clothed himself in a 
loose tunic, which he made to bag greatly at 
the waist, and placing upon his feet the widest 
buskins that he could anywhere find, followed 
his guides into the treasure-house. Here he fell 
to upon a heap of gold-dust, and in the first 
place packed as much as he could inside his 
buskins, between them and his legs; after 
which he filled the breast of his tunic quite full 
of gold, and then sprinkling some among his 
hair, and taking some likewise in his mouth, 
he came forth from the treasure-house, scarce¬ 
ly able to drag his legs along, like anything 
rather than a man, with his mouth crammed 
full, and his bulk increased every way. On see¬ 
ing him, Croesus burst into a laugh, and not 
only let him have all that he had taken, but 
gave him presents besides of fully equal worth. 
Thus this house became one of great wealth; 
and Alcmaeon was able to keep horses for the 
chariot-race, and won the prize at Olympia. 

126. Afterwards, in the generation which 
followed, Clisthenes, king of Sicyon, raised the 
family to still greater eminence among the 
Greeks than even that to which it had attained 
before. For this Clisthenes, who was the son 
of Aristonymus, the grandson of Myron, and 
the great-grandson of Andreas, had a daugh¬ 
ter, called Agarista, whom he wished to marry 
to the best husband that he could find in the 
whole of Greece. At the Olympic Games, there¬ 
fore, having gained the prize in the chariot- 
race, he caused public proclamation to be made 
to the following effect:—“Whoever among the 
Greeks deems himself worthy to become the 
son-in-law of Clisthenes, let him come, sixty 
days hence, or, if he will, sooner, to Sicyon; for 
within a year’s time, counting from the end of 
the sixty days, Clisthenes will decide on the 
man to whom he shall contract his daughter.” 
So all the Greeks who were proud of their own 
merit or of their country flocked to Sicyon as 
suitors; and Clisthenes had a foot-course and 
a wrestling-ground made ready, to try their 
powers. 

127. From Italy there came Smindyrides, 




210 HERODOTUS [Book vi 


the son of Hippocrates, a native of Sybaris— 
which city about that time was at the very 
height of its prosperity. He was a man who 
in luxuriousness of living exceeded all other 
persons. Likewise there came Damasus, the 
son of Amyris, surnamed the Wise, a native of 
Siris. These two were the only suitors from 
Italy. From the Ionian Gulf appeared Am- 
phimnestus, the son of Epistrophus, an Epi- 
damnian; from /Etolia Males, the brother of 
that Titormus who excelled all the Greeks in 
strength, and who wishing to avoid his fellow- 
men, withdrew himself into the remotest parts 
of the iEtolian territory. From the Pelopon- 
nese came several—Leocedes, son of that Phei- 
don, king of the Argives, who established 
weights and measures throughout the Pelopon- 
nese, and was the most insolent of all the 
Grecians—the same who drove out the Elean 
directors of the Games, and himself presided 
over the contests at Olympia—Leocedes, I 
say, appeared, this Pheidon’s son; and likewise 
Amiantus, son of Lycurgus, an Arcadian of the 
city of Trapezus; Laphanes, an Azenian of 
Pa::us, whose father, Euphorion, as the story 
goes in Arcadia, entertained the Dioscuri at 
his residence, and thenceforth kept open 
house for all comers; and lastly, Onomastus, 
the son of Agaeus, a native of Elis. These four 
came from the Peloponnese. From Athens 
there arrived Megacles, the son of that Alcmae- 
on who visited Croesus, and Tisander’s son, 
Hippoclides, the wealthiest and handsomest of 
the Athenians. There was likewise one Eu- 
boean, Lysanias, who came from Eretria, then 
a flourishing city. From Thessaly came Diac- 
torides, a Cranonian, of the race of the Sco- 
padae; and Alcon arrived from the Molossians. 
This was the list of the suitors. 

128. Now when they were all come, and the 
day appointed had arrived, Clisthenes first of 
all inquired of each concerning his country 
and his family; after which he kept them with 
him a year, and made trial of their manly bear¬ 
ing, their temper, their accomplishments, and 
their disposition, sometimes drawing them 
apart for converse, sometimes bringing them 
all together. Such as were still youths he took 
with him from time to time to the gymnasia; 
but the greatest trial of all was at the banquet- 
table. During the whole period of their stay he 
lived with them as I have said; and, further, 
from first to last he entertained them sumptu¬ 
ously. Somehow or other the suitors who came 
from Athens pleased him the best of all; and 
of these Hippoclides, Tisander’s son, was 


specially in favour, partly on account of his 
manly bearing, and partly also because his 
ancestors were of kin to the Corinthian Cypse- ' 
lids. 

129. When at length the day arrived which 
had been fixed for the espousals, and Clisthenes 
had to speak out and declare his choice, he first ' 
of all made a sacrifice of a hundred oxen, and 
held a banquet, whereat he entertained all the , 
suitors and the whole people of Sicyon. After , 
the feast was ended, the suitors vied with each 
other in music and in speaking on a given 
subject. Presently, as the drinking advanced, 1 
Hippoclides, who quite dumbfoundered the j 
rest, called aloud to the flute-player, and bade 
him strike up a dance; which the man did, and 
Hippoclides danced to it. And he fancied that 
he was dancing excellently well; but Clisthe- j 
nes, who was observing him, began to mis¬ 
doubt the whole business. Then Hippoclides, 
after a pause, told an attendant to bring in a 
table; and when it was brought, he mounted I 
upon it and danced first of all some Laconian 
figures, then some Attic ones; after which he 
stood on his head upon the table, and began to 
toss his legs about. Clisthenes, notwithstand- j 
ing that he now loathed Hippoclides for a son- | 
in-law, by reason of his dancing and his jl 
shamelessness, still, as he wished to avoid an | 
outbreak, had restrained himself during the 
first and likewise during the second dance; 
when, however, he saw him tossing his legs 

in the air, he could no longer contain himself, 
but cried out, “Son of Tisander, thou hast 
danced thy wife away!” “What does Hippo¬ 
clides care.'” was the other’s answer. And 
hence the proverb arose. 

130. Then Clisthenes commanded silence, 
and spake thus before the assembled com¬ 
pany:— 

“Suitors of my daughter, well pleased am I 
with you all; and right willingly, if it were pos¬ 
sible, would I content you all, and not by mak¬ 
ing choice of one appear to put a slight upon 
the rest. But as it is out of my power, seeing 
that I have but one daughter, to grant to all 
their wishes, I will present to each of you 
whom I must needs dismiss a talent of silver, 
for the honour that you have done me in seek¬ 
ing to ally yourselves with my house, and for 
your long absence from your homes. But my I 
daughter, Agarista, I betroth to Megacles, the . 
son of Alcmxon, to be his wife, according to i • 
the usage and wont of Athens.” 

Then Megacles expressed his readiness; and 
Clisthenes had the marriage solemnised. 








128-136] THE HISTORY 211 


131. Thus ended the affair of the suitors; 
and thus the Alcmseonida! came to be famous 
throughout the whole of Greece. The issue of 
this marriage was the Clisthenes—so named 
after his grandfather the Sicyonian—who 
made the tribes at Athens, and set up the pop¬ 
ular government. Megacles had likewise an¬ 
other son, called Hippocrates, whose children 
were a Megacles and an Agarista, the latter 
named after Agarista the daughter of Clis¬ 
thenes. She married Xanthippus, the son of 
Ariphron; and when she was with child by 
him had a dream, wherein she fancied that she 
was delivered of a lion; after which, within a 
few days, she bore Xanthippus a son, to wit, 
Pericles. 

132. After the blow struck at Marathon, 
Miltiades, who was previously held in high es¬ 
teem by his countrymen, increased yet more in 
influence. Hence, when he told them that he 
wanted a fleet of seventy ships, with an armed 
force, and money, without informing them 
what country he was going to attack, but only 
promising to enrich them if they would ac¬ 
company him, seeing that it was a right 
wealthy land, where they might easily get as 
much gold as they cared to have—when he 
told them this, they were quite carried away, 
and gave him the whole armament which he 
required. 

133. So Miltiades, having got the armament, 
sailed against Paros, with the object, as he al¬ 
leged, of punishing the Parians for having gone 
to war with Athens, inasmuch as a trireme of 
theirs had come with the Persian fleet to Mara¬ 
thon. This, however, was a mere pretence; the 
truth was, that Miltiades owed the Parians a 
grudge, because Lysagoras, the son of Tisias, 
who was a Parian by birth, had told tales 
against him to Hydarnes the Persian. Arrived 
before the place against which his expedition 
was designed, he drove the Parians within 
their walls, and forthwith laid siege to the 
city. At the same time he sent a herald to the 
inhabitants, and required of them a hundred 
talents, threatening that, if they refused, he 
would press the siege, and never give it over 
till the town was taken. But the Parians, with¬ 
out giving his demand a thought, proceeded 
to use every means that they could devise for 
the defence of their city, and even invented 
new plans for the purpose, one of which was, 
by working at night, to raise such parts of the 
wall as were likely to be carried by assault to 
double their former height. 

134. Thus far all the Greeks agree in their 


accounts of this business; what follows is re¬ 
lated upon the testimony of the Parians only. 
Miltiades had come to his wit’s end, when one 
of the prisoners, a woman named Timo, who 
was by birth a Parian, and had held the office 
of under-priestess in the temple of the infernal 
goddesses, came and conferred with him. This 
woman, they say, being introduced into the 
presence of Miltiades, advised him, if he set 
great store by the capture of the place, to do 
something which she could suggest to him. 
When therefore she had told him what it was 
she meant, he betook himself to the hill which 
lies in front of the city, and there leapt the 
fence enclosing the precinct of Ceres Thes- 
mophorus, since he was not able to open the 
door. After leaping into the place he went 
straight to the sanctuary, intending to do 
something within it—either to remove some of 
the holy things which it was not lawful to stir, 
or to perform some act or other, I cannot say 
what—and had just reached the door, when 
suddenly a feeling of horror came upon him, 
and he returned back the way he had come; 
but in jumping down from the outer wall, he 
strained his thigh, or, as some say, struck the 
ground with his knee. 

135. So Miltiades returned home sick, with¬ 
out bringing the Athenians any money, and 
without conquering Paros, having done no 
more than to besiege the town for six-and- 
twenty days, and ravage the remainder of the 
island. The Parians, however, when it came 
to their knowledge that Timo, the under-pries¬ 
tess of the goddesses, had advised Miltiades 
what he should do, were minded to punish 
her for her crime; they therefore sent messen¬ 
gers to Delphi, as soon as the siege was at an 
end, and asked the god if they should put the 
under-priestess to death. “She had discovered,” 
they said, “to the enemies of her country how 
they might bring it into subjection, and had 
exhibited to Miltiades mysteries which it was 
not lawful for a man to know.” But the Pytho¬ 
ness forbade them, and said, “Timo was not 
in fault; ’twas decreed that Miltiades should 
come to an unhappy end; and she was sent to 
lure him to his destruction.” Such was the an¬ 
swer given to the Parians by the Pythoness. 

136., The Athenians, upon the return of Mil¬ 
tiades from Paros, had much debate concern¬ 
ing him; and Xanthippus, the son of Ari¬ 
phron, who spoke more freely against him 
than all the rest, impleaded him before the peo¬ 
ple, and brought him to trial for his life, on 
the charge of having dealt deceitfully with the 


212 HERODOTUS [Book vi 


Athenians. Miltiades, though he was present in 
court, did not speak in his own defence; for his 
thigh had begun to mortify, and disabled him 
from pleading his cause. He was forced to lie 
on a couch while his defence was made by his 
friends, who dwelt at most length on the fight 
at Marathon, while they made mention also 
of the capture of Lemnos, telling how Milti¬ 
ades took the island, and, after executing ven¬ 
geance on the Pelasgians, gave up his conquest 
to Athens. The judgment of the people was in 
his favour so far as to spare his life; but for the 
wrong he had done them they fined him fifty 
talents. Soon afterwards his thigh completely 
gangrened and mortified; and so Miltiades 
died; and the fifty talents were paid by his son 
Cimon. 

137. Now the way in which Miltiades had 
made himself master of Lemnos was the fol¬ 
lowing. There were certain Pelasgians whom 
the Athenians once drove out of Attica; wheth¬ 
er they did it justly or unjustly I cannot say, 
since I only know what is reported concern¬ 
ing it, which is the following: Hecataeus, the 
son of Hegesander, says in his History that it 
was unjustly. “The Athenians,” according to 
him, “had given to the Pelasgi a tract of land 
at the foot of Hymettus as payment for the 
wall with which the Pelasgians had surround¬ 
ed their citadel. This land was barren, and lit¬ 
tle worth at the time; but the Pelasgians 
brought it into good condition; whereupon the 
Athenians begrudged them the tract, and de¬ 
sired to recover it. And so, without any better 
excuse, they took arms and drove out the Pelas¬ 
gians.” But the Athenians maintain that they 
were justified in what they did. “The Pelasgi¬ 
ans,” they say, “while they lived at the foot of 
Hymettus, were wont to sally forth from that 
region and commit outrages on their children. 
For the Athenians used at that time to send 
their sons and daughters to draw water at the 
fountain called ‘ the Nine Springs,’ inasmuch 
as neither they nor the other Greeks had any 
household slaves in those days; and the maid¬ 
ens, whenever they came, were used rudely 
and insolently by the Pelasgians. Nor were 
they even content thus; but at the last they 
laid a plot, and were caught by the Athenians 
in the act of making an attempt upon their 
city. Then did the Athenians give a proof how 
much better men they were than the Pelas¬ 
gians; for whereas they might justly have 
killed them all, having caught them in the very 
act of rebelling, they spared their lives, and 
only required that they should leave the coun¬ 


try. Hereupon the Pelasgians quitted Attica, 
and settled in Lemnos and other places.” Such 
are the accounts respectively of Hecataeus and 
the Athenians. 

138. These same Pelasgians, after they were 
settled in Lemnos, conceived the wish to be re¬ 
venged on the Athenians. So, as they were well 
acquainted with the Athenian festivals, they 
manned some penteconters, and having laid 
an ambush to catch the Athenian women as 
they kept the festival of Diana at Brauron, 
they succeeded in carrying off a large number, 
whom they took to Lemnos and there kept as 
concubines. After a while the women bore chil¬ 
dren, whom they taught to speak the language 
of Attica and observe the manners of the 
Athenians. These boys refused to have any 
commerce with the sons of the Pelasgian wom¬ 
en; and if a Pelasgian boy struck one of their 
number, they all made common cause, and 
joined in avenging their comrade; nay, the 
Greek boys even set up a claim to exercise lord- 
ship over the others, and succeeded in gaining 
the upper hand. When these things came to the 
ears of the Pelasgians, they took counsel to¬ 
gether, and, on considering the matter, they 
grew frightened, and said one to another, “If 
these boys even now are resolved to make com¬ 
mon cause against the sons of our lawful 
wives, and seek to exercise lordship over them, 
what may we expect when they grow up to be 
men.^” Then it seemed good to the Pelasgians 
to kill all the sons of the Attic women; which 
they did accordingly, and at the same time slew 
likewise their mothers. From this deed, and 
that former crime of the Lemnian women, 
when they slew their husbands in the days of 
Thoas, it has come to be usual throughout 
Greece to call wicked actions by the name of 
“Lemnian deeds.” 

139. When the Pelasgians had thus slain 
their children and their women, the earth re¬ 
fused to bring forth its fruits for them, and 
their wives bore fewer children, and their 
flocks and herds increased more slowly than 
before, till at last, sore pressed by famine and 
bereavement, they sent men to Delphi, and 
begged the god to tell them how they might 
obtain deliverance from their sufferings. The 
Pythoness answered that “they must give the 
Athenians whatever satisfaction they might 
demand.” Then the Pelasgians went to Athens 
and declared their wish to give the Athenians 
satisfaction for the wrong which they had 
done to them. So the Athenians had a couch 
prepared in their townhall, and adorned it 





127-140] THE HISTORY 213 


with the fairest coverlets, and set by its side a 
table laden with all manner of good things, 
and then told the Pelasgians they must de¬ 
liver up their country to them in a similar con¬ 
dition. The Pelasgians answered and said, 
“When a ship comes with a north wind from 
your country to ours in a single day, then will 
we give it up to you.” This they said because 
they knew that what they required was impos¬ 
sible, for Attica lies a long way to the south of 
Lemnos. 

140. No more passed at that time. But very 
many years afterwards, when the Hellespon- 


tian Chersonese had been brought under the 
power of Athens, Miltiades, the son of Cimon, 
sailed, during the prevalence of the Etesian 
winds, from Elaeus in the Chersonese to Lem¬ 
nos, and called on the Pelasgians to quit their 
island, reminding them of the prophecy which 
they had supposed it impossible to fulfil. The 
people of Hephaestia obeyed the call; but they 
of Myrina, not acknowledging the Chersonese 
to be any part of Attica, refused and were be¬ 
sieged and brought over by force. Thus was 
Lemnos gained by the Athenians and Milti¬ 
ades. 
