The Ninth Book, Entitled 
CALLIOPE 




I. Mardonius, when Alexander upon his re¬ 
turn made known to him the answer of the 
Athenians, forthwith broke up from Thessaly, 
and led his army with all speed against Athens; 
forcing the several nations through whose land 
he passed to furnish him with additional 
troops. The chief men of Thessaly, far from 
repenting of the part which they had taken in 
the war hitherto, urged on the Persians to the 
attack more earnestly than ever. Thorax of 
Larissa in particular, who had helped to es¬ 
cort Xerxes on his flight to Asia, now openly 
encouraged Mardonius in his march upon 
Greece. 

2. When the army reached Boeotia, the The¬ 
bans sought to induce Mardonius to make a 
halt: “He would not,” they told him, “find 
anywhere a more convenient place in which to 
pitch his camp; and their advice to him was, 
that he should go no further, but fix himself 
there, and thence take measures to subdue all 
Greece without striking a blow. If the Greeks, 
who had held together hitherto, still continued 
united among themselves, it would be difficult 
for the whole world to overcome them by force 
of arms. But if thou wilt do as we advise,” 
they went on to say, “thou mayest easily ob¬ 
tain the direction of all their counsels. Send 
presents to the men of most weight in the sev¬ 
eral states, and by so doing thou wilt sow divi¬ 
sion among them. After that, it will be a light 
task, with the help of such as side with thee, to 
bring under all thy adversaries.” 

3. Such was the advice of the Thebans: but 
Mardonius did not follow it. A strong desire 
of taking Athens a second time possessed him, 
in part arising from his inborn stubbornness, 
in part from a wish to inform the king at Sar¬ 
dis, by fire-signals along the islands, that he 
was master of the place. However, he did not 
on his arrival in Attica find the Athenians in 
their country—they had again withdrawn. 


some to their ships, but the greater part to 
Salamis—and he only gained possession of a 
deserted town. It was ten months after the tak¬ 
ing of the city by the king that Mardonius 
came against it for the second time. 

4. Mardonius, being now in Athens, sent 
an envoy to Salamis, one Murychides, a Helles- 
pontine Greek, to offer the Athenians once 
more the same terms which had been con¬ 
veyed to them by Alexander. The reason for 
his sending a second time, though he knew be¬ 
forehand their unfriendly feelings towards 
him, was,—that he hoped, when they saw the 
whole land of Attica conquered and in his 
power, their stubbornness would begin to give 
way. On this account, therefore, he dispatched 
Murychides to Salamis. 

5. Now, when Murychides came before the 
council, and delivered his message, one of the 
councillors, named Lycidas, gave it as his opin¬ 
ion—“that the best course would be, to admit 
the proposals brought by Murychides, and lay 
them before the assembly of the people.” This 
he stated to be his opinion, perhaps because he 
had been bribed by Mardonius, or it may be 
because that course really appeared to him the 
most expedient. However, the Athenians— 
both those in the council, and those who stood 
without, when they heard of the advice—were 
full of wrath, and forthwith surrounded Lyci¬ 
das, and stoned him to death. As for Mury¬ 
chides, the Hellespontine Greek, him they sent 
away unharmed. Now there was a stir in the 
island about Lycidas, and the Athenian wom¬ 
en learnt what had happened. Then each ex¬ 
horted her fellow, and one brought another 
to take part in the deed; and they all flocked of 
their own accord to the house of Lycidas, and 
stoned to death his wife and his children. 

6. The circumstances under which the Athe¬ 
nians had sought refuge in Salamis were the 
following. So long as any hope remained that 

288 





THE HISTORY 


a Peloponnesian army would come to give 
them aid, they abode still in Attica; but when 
it appeared that the allies were slack and slow 
to move, while the invader was reported to be 
pressing forward and to have already entered 
Bccotia, then they proceeded to remove their 
goods and chattels from the mainland, and 
themselves again crossed the strait to Salamis. 
At the same time they sent ambassadors to 
Lacedaemon, who were to reproach the Lace¬ 
daemonians for having allowed the barbarian 
to advance into Attica, instead of joining them 
and going out to meet him in Bceotia. They 
were likewise to remind the Lacedaemonians ot 
the offers by which the Persian had sought to 
win Athens over to his side, and to warn them, 
that if no aid came from Sparta, the Athenians 
must consult for their own safety. 

7. The truth was, the Lacedaemonians were 
keeping holiday at that time; for it was the 
feast of the Hyacinthia, and they thought noth¬ 
ing of so much moment as to perform the serv¬ 
ice of the god. They were also engaged in 
building their wall across the Isthmus, which 
was now so far advanced that the battlements 
had begun to be placed upon it. 

When the envoys of the Athenians, accom¬ 
panied by ambassadors from Megara and Pla- 
ta:a, reached Lacedaemon, they came before the 
Ephors, and spoke as follows:— 

“The Athenians have sent us to you to say, 
—the king of the Medes offers to give us back 
our country, and wishes to conclude an alliance 
with us on fair and equal terms, without fraud 
or deceit. He is willing likewise to bestow on 
us another country besides our own, and bids 
us choose any land that we like. But we, be- 
' cause we reverenced Hellenic Jupiter, and 
' thought it a shameful act to betray Greece, in¬ 
stead of consenting to these terms, refused 
them; notwithstanding that we have been 
wronged and deserted by the other Greeks, and 
are fully aware that it is far more for our ad¬ 
vantage to make peace with the Persian than 
to prolong the war with him. Still we shall not, 
of our own free will, consent to any terms of 
peace. Thus do we, in all our dealings with the 
Greeks, avoid what is base and counterfeit; 
while contrariwise, ye, who were but now so 
full of fear least we should make terms with 
the enemy, having learnt of what temper we 
are, and assured yourselves that we shall not 
prove traitors to our country—having brought 
moreover your wall across the Isthmus to an 
advanced state—cease altogether to have any 
care for us. Ye covenanted with us to go out 


289 

and meet the Persian in Berotia; but when the 
time came, ye were false to your word, and 
looked on while the barbarian host advanced 
into Attica. At this time, therefore, the Athe¬ 
nians are angered with you; and justly,—for 
ye have not done what was right. They bid 
you, however, make haste to send forth your 
army, that we may even yet meet Mardonius in 
Attica. Now that Bceotia is lost to us, the best 
place for the fight within our country, will be 
the plain of Thria.” 

8. The Ephors, when they had heard this 
speech, delayed their answer till the morrow; 
and when the morrow came, till the day fol¬ 
lowing. And thus they acted for ten days, con¬ 
tinually putting off the ambassadors from one 
day to the next. Meanwhile the Peloponnesians 
generally were labouring with great zeal at the 
wall, and the work nearly approached com¬ 
pletion. I can give no other reason for the con¬ 
duct of the Lacedaemonians in showing them¬ 
selves so anxious, at the time when Alexander 
came, that the Athenians should not join the 
Medes, and now being quite careless about it, 
except that at the former time the wall across 
the Isthmus was not complete, and they 
worked at it in great fear of the Persians, 
whereas now the bulwark had been raised, and 
so they imagined that they had no further need 
of the Athenians. 

9. At last the ambassadors got an answer, 
and the troops marched forth from Sparta, un¬ 
der the following circumstances. The last audi¬ 
ence had been fixed for the ambassadors, when, 
the very day before it was to be given, a cer¬ 
tain Tegean, named Chileiis, a man who had 
more influence at Sparta than any other for¬ 
eigner, learning from the Ephors exactly what 
the Athenians had said, addressed these words 
to them—“The case stands thus, O ye Ephors! 
If the Athenians are not our friends, but league 
themselves with the barbarians, however 
strong our wall across the Isthmus may be, 
there will be doors enough, and wide enough 
open too, by which the Persian may gain en¬ 
trance to the Peloponnese. Grant their request 
then, before they make any fresh resolve, 
which may bring Greece to ruin.” 

TO. 'Such was the counsel which Chileiis 
gave: and the Ephors, taking the advice into 
consideration, determined forthwith, without 
speaking a word to the ambassadors from the 
three cities, to despatch to the Isthmus a body 
of five thousand Spartans; and accordingly 
they sent them forth the same night, appoint¬ 
ing to each Spartan a retinue of seven Helots, 







290 HERODOTUS [Book ix I’ 


and giving the command of the expedition to 
Pausanias the son of Cleombrotus. The chief 
power belonged of right at this time to Pleis- 
tarchus, the son of Leonidas; but as he was 
still a child Pausanias, his cousin, was regent 
in his room. For the father of Pausanias, Cle¬ 
ombrotus, the son of Anaxandridas, no longer 
lived; he had died a short time after bringing 
back from the Isthmus the troops who had 
been employed in building the wall. A prodigy 
had caused him to bring his army home; for 
while he was offering sacrifice to know if he 
should march out against the Persian, the sun 
was suddenly darkened in mid sky. Pausanias 
took with him, as joint-leader of the army, Eu- 
ryanax, the son of Dorieus, a member of his 
own family. 

11. The army accordingly had marched out 
from Sparta with Pausanias: while the ambas¬ 
sadors, when day came, appeared before the 
Ephors, knowing nothing of the march of the 
troops, and purposing themselves to leave Spar¬ 
ta forthwith, and return each man to his own 
country. They therefore addressed the Ephors 
in these words:—“Lacedaemonians, as you do 
not stir from home, but keep the Hyacinthian 
festival, and amuse yourselves, deserting the 
cause of your confederates, the Athenians, 
whom your behaviour wrongs, and who have 
no other allies, will make such terms with the 
Persians as they shall find possible. Now when 
terms are once made, it is plain that, having 
become the king’s allies, we shall march with 
the barbarians whithersoever they choose to 
lead. Then at length you will perceive what 
the consequences will be to yourselves.” When 
the envoys had spoken, the Ephors declared to 
them with an oath:—“Our troops must be at 
Oresteum by this time, on their march against 
the strangers.” (The Spartans say “strangers” 
for “barbarians.”) At this the ambassadors, 
quite ignorant of what had happened, ques¬ 
tioned them concerning their meaning; and 
when, by much questioning, they had discov¬ 
ered the truth, they were greatly astonished 
thereat, and forthwith set off, at their best 
speed, to overtake the Spartan army. At the 
same time a body of five thousand Lacedae¬ 
monian Perioeci, all picked men and fully 
armed, set forth from Sparta, in the company 
of the ambassadors. 

12. So these troops marched in haste to¬ 
wards the Isthmus. Meanwhile the Argives, 
who had promised Mardonius that they would 
stop the Spartans from crossing their borders, 
as soon as they learnt that Pausanias with his 


army had started from Sparta, took the swift- | 
est courier they could find, and sent him off ^ 
to Attica. The message which he delivered, on \ 
his arrival at Athens, was the following: “Mar- |l 
donius,” he said, “the Argives have sent me to || 
tell thee that the Lacedaemonian youth are I 
gone forth from their city, and that the Argives 
are too weak to hinder them. Take good heed 
therefore to thyself at this time.” After thus 
speaking, without a word more, he returned 
home. 

13. When Mardonius learnt that the Spar¬ 
tans were on their march, he no longer cared 
to remain in Attica. Hitherto he had kept 
quiet, wishing to see what the Athenians 
would do, and had neither ravaged their terri¬ 
tory, nor done it any the least harm; for till 
now he had cherished the hope that the Athe¬ 
nians would come to terms with him. As, how¬ 
ever, he found that his persuasions were of no 
avail, and as their whole policy was now clear 
to him, he determined to withdraw from At¬ 
tica before Pausanias with his army reached 
the Isthmus; first, however, he resolved to burn 
Athens, and to cast down and level with the 
ground whatever remained standing of the 
walls, temples, and other buildings. His rea¬ 
son for retreating was, that Attica was not a 
country where horse could act with advantage; 
and further, that if he suffered defeat in a bat¬ 
tle, no way of escape was open to him, except 
through defiles, where a handful of troops 
might stop all his army. So he determined to 
withdraw to Thebes, and give the Greeks bat¬ 
tle in the neighbourhood of a friendly city, 
and on ground well suited for cavalry. 

14. After he had quitted Attica and was al¬ 
ready upon his march, news reached him that 
a body of a thousand Lacedaemonians, distinct 
from the army of Pausanias, and sent on in 
advance, had arrived in the Megarid. When he 
heard it, wishing, if possible, to destroy this de¬ 
tachment first, Mardonius considered with 
himself how he might compass their ruin. 
With a sudden change of march he made for 
Megara, while the horse, pushing on in ad¬ 
vance, entered and ravaged the Megarid. 
(Here was the furthest point in Europe to¬ 
wards the setting sun to which this Persian 
army ever penetrated.) 

15. After this, Mardonius received another 
message, whereby he learnt that the forces of 
the Greeks were collected together at the Isth¬ 
mus; which tidings caused him to draw back, 
and leave Attica by the way of Deceleia. The 
Boeotarchs had sent for some of the neighbours 





ii-i8 1 THE HISTORY 291 


of the Asopians; and these persons served as 
guides to the army, and led them first to Sphen- 
dale, and from thence to Tanagra, where Mar- 
donius rested a night; after which, upon the 
morrow, he bent his course to Scolus, which 
brought him into the territory of the Thebans. 
And now, although the Thebans had espoused 
the cause of the Medes, yet Mardonius cut 
down all the trees in these parts; not however 
from any enmity towards the Thebans, but on 
account of his own urgent needs; for he wanted 
a rampart to protect his army from attack, and 
he likewise desired to have a place of refuge, 
whither his troops might flee, in case the battle 
should go contrary to his wishes. His army at 
this time lay on the Asopus, and stretched 
from Erythrae, along by Hysiae, to the territory 
of the Plataeans. The wall, however, was not 
made to extend so far, but formed a square of 
about ten furlongs each way. 

While the barbarians were employed in this 
work, a certain citizen of Thebes, Attaginus 
by name, the son of Phrynon, having made 
great preparations, gave a banquet, and invited 
Mardonius thereto, together with fitty of the 
noblest Persians. Now the banquet was held 
at Thebes; and all the guests who were invited 
came to it. 

16. What follows was recounted to me by 
Thersander, a native of Orchomenus, a man 
of the first rank in that city. Thersander told 
me that he was himself among those invited to 
the feast, and that besides the Persians fifty 
Thebans were asked; and the two nations 
were not arranged separately, but a Persian 
and a Theban were set side by side upon each 
couch. After the feast was ended, and the 
drinking had begun, the Persian who shared 
Thersander’s couch addressed him in the 
Greek tongue, and inquired of him from what 
city he came. He answered, that he was of 
Orchomenus; whereupon the other said— 

“Since thou hast eaten with me at one table, 
and poured libation from one cup, I would 
fain leave with thee a memorial of the belief 
I hold—the rather that thou mayest have time¬ 
ly warning thyself, and so be able to provide 
for thy own safety. Seest thou these Persians 
here feasting, and the army which we left en¬ 
camped yonder by the river-side? Yet a little 
while, and of all this number thou wilt behold 
but a few surviving!” 

As he spake, the Persian let fall a flood of 
tears: whereon Thersander, who was aston¬ 
ished at his words, replied—“Surely thou 
shouldest say all this to Mardonius, and the 


Persians who are next him in honour”—but 
the other rejoined—“Dear friend, it is not pos¬ 
sible for man to avert that which God has de¬ 
creed shall happen. No one believes warnings, 
however true. Many of us Persians know our 
danger, but we are constrained by necessity to 
do as our leader bids us. Verily ’tis the sorest 
of all human ills, to abound in knowledge and 
yet have no power over action.” All this I heard 
myself from Thersander the Orchomenian; 
who told me further, that he mentioned what 
had happened to divers persons, before the bat¬ 
tle was fought at Platxa. 

17. When Mardonius formerly held his 
camp in Bccotia, all the Greeks of those parts 
who were friendly to the Medes sent troops to 
join his army, and these troops accompanied 
him in his attack 4jpon Athens. The Phocians 
alone abstained, and took no part in the inva¬ 
sion; for, though they had espoused the Medi¬ 
an cause warmly, it was very much against 
their will, and only because they were com¬ 
pelled so to do. However, a few days after the 
arrival of the Persian army at Thebes, a thou¬ 
sand of their heavy-armed soldiers came up, 
under the command of Harmocydes, one of 
their most distinguished citizens. No sooner 
had these troops reached Thebes, than some 
horsemen came to them from Mardonius, with 
orders that they should take up a position 
upon the plain, away from the rest of the army. 
The Phocians did so, and forthwith the entire 
Persian cavalry drew nigh to them: where¬ 
upon there went a rumour through the whole 
of the Greek force encamped with the Medes, 
that Mardonius was about to destroy the Pho¬ 
cians with missiles. The same conviction ran 
through the Phocian troops themselves; and 
Harmocydes, their leader, addressed them 
thus with words of encouragement—“Phoci¬ 
ans” said he, “ ’tis plain that these men have 
resolved beforehand to take our lives, because 
of the accusations of the Thessalians, as I im¬ 
agine. Now, then, is the time for you all to 
show yourselves brave men. ’Tis better to die 
fighting and defending our lives, than tamely 
to allow them to slay us in this shameful fash¬ 
ion. Let them learn that they are barbarians, 
and that the men whose death they have plot¬ 
ted are Greeks!” 

18. Thus spake Harmocydes; and the Per¬ 
sian horse, having encircled the Phocians, 
charged towards them, as if about to deal out 
death, with bows bent, and arrows ready to be 
let fly; nay, here and there some did even dis¬ 
charge their weapons. But the Phocians stood 





292 HERODOTUS [Book ix 


firm, keeping close one to another, and serry- 
ing their ranks as much as possible: where¬ 
upon the horse suddenly wheeled round and 
rode ofl. I cannot say with certainty whether 
they came, at the prayer of the Thessalians, to 
destroy the Phocians, but seeing them pre¬ 
pared to stand on their defence, and fearing to 
sufler damage at their hands, on that account 
beat a retreat, having orders from Mardonius 
so to act; or whether his sole intent was to try 
the temper of the Phocians and see whether 
they had any courage or no. However this may 
have been, when the horsemen retired, Mar¬ 
donius sent a herald to the Phocians, saying— 
“Fear not, Phocians—ye have shown your¬ 
selves valiant men—much unlike the report I 
had heard of you. Now therefore be forward 
in the coming war. Ye will not readily outdo 
either the king or myself in services.” Thus 
ended the affair of the Phocians. 

19. The Lacedaemonians, when they reached 
the Isthmus, pitched their camp there; and the 
other Peloponnesians who had embraced the 
good side, hearing or else seeing that they were 
upon the march, thought it not right to re¬ 
main behind when the Spartans were going 
forth to the war. So the Peloponnesians went 
out in one body from the Isthmus, the victims 
being favourable for setting forth; and 
marched as far as Eleusis, where again they 
offered sacrifices, and, finding the omens still 
encouraging, advanced further. At Eleusis 
they were joined by the Athenians, who had 
come across from Salamis, and now accom¬ 
panied the main army. On reaching Erythrae 
in Boeotia, they learnt that the barbarians 
were encamped upon the Asopus; wherefore 
they themselves, after considering how they 
should act, disposed their forces opposite 
to the enemy upon the slopes of Mount 
Cithaeron. 

20. Mardonius, when he saw that the Greeks 
would not come down into the plain, sent all 
his cavalry, under Masistius (or Macistius, as 
the Greeks call him), to attack them where 
they were. Now Masistius was a man of much 
repute among the Persians, and rode a Nisaean 
charger with a golden bit, and otherwise mag¬ 
nificently caparisoned. So the horse advanced 
against the Greeks, and made attacks upon 
them in divisions, doing them great damage 
at each charge, and insulting them by calling 
them women. 

21. It chanced that the Megarians were 
drawn up in the position most open to attack, 
and where the ground offered the best ap¬ 


proach to the cavalry. Finding themselves 
therefore hard pressed by the assaults upon 
their ranks, they sent a herald to the Greek 
leaders, who came and said to them, “This is 
the message of the Megarians—We cannot, 
brothers-in-arms, continue to resist the Persian 
horse in that post which we have occupied 
from the first, if we are left without succours. 
Hitherto, although hard pressed, we have held 
out against them firmly and courageously. 
Now, however, if you do not send others to 
take our place, we warn you that we shall quit 
our post.” Such were the words of the herald. 
Pausanias, when he heard them, inquired 
among his troops if there were any who would 
volunteer to take the post, and so relieve the 
Megarians. Of the rest none were willing to go, 
whereupon the Athenians offered themselves; 
and a body of picked men, three hundred in 
number, commanded by Olympiodorus, the 
son of Lampo, undertook the service. 1 

22. Selecting, to accompany them, the whole I 
body of archers, these men relieved the Meg¬ 
arians, and occupied a post which all the oth¬ 
er Greeks collected at Erythrae had shrunk 
from holding. After the struggle had contin¬ 
ued for a while, it came to an end on this wise. 
As the barbarians continued charging in divi¬ 
sions, the horse of Masistius, which was in 
front of the others, received an arrow in his 
flank, the pain of which caused him to rear 
and throw his rider. Immediately the Athe¬ 
nians rushed upon Masistius as he lay, caught 
his horse, and when he himself made resist¬ 
ance, slew him. At first, however, they were 
not able to take his life; for his armour hin¬ 
dered them. He had on a breastplate formed 
of golden scales, with a scarlet tunic covering 
it. Thus the blows, all falling upon his breast¬ 
plate, took no effect, till one of the soldiers, 
perceiving the reason, drove his weapon into 
his eye and so slew him. All this took place 
without any of the other horsemen seeing it: 
they had neither observed their leader fall 
from his horse, nor beheld him slain; for he 
fell as they wheeled round and prepared for 
another charge, so that they were quite igno¬ 
rant of what had happened. When, however, 
they halted, and found that there was no one 
to marshal their line, Masistius was missed; 
and instantly his soldiers, understanding what 
must have befallen him, with loud cheers 
charged the enemy in one mass, hoping to re¬ 
cover the dead body. 

23. So when the Athenians saw that, instead 
of coining up in squadrons, the whole mass of 



19 - 26 ] THE HISTORY 293 


the horse was about to charge them at once, 
they called out to the other troops to make 
haste to their aid. While the rest of the infan¬ 
try, however, was moving to their assistance, 
the contest waxed fierce about the dead body 
of Masistius. The three hundred, so long as 
they fought by themselves, had greatly the 
worse of the encounter, and were forced to re¬ 
tire and yield up the body to the enemy; but 
when the other troops approached, the Per¬ 
sian horse could no longer hold their ground, 
but fled without carrying off the body, having 
incurred in the attempt a further loss of sev¬ 
eral of their number. They therefore retired 
about two furlongs, and consulted with each 
other what was best to be done. Being without 
a leader, it seemed to them the fittest course 
to return to Mardonius. 

24. When the horse reached the camp, Mar¬ 
donius and all the Persian army made great 
lamentation for Masistius. They shaved off all 
the hair from their own heads, and cut the 
manes from their war-horses and their sump- 
ter-beasts, while they vented their grief in such 
loud cries that all Boeotia resounded with the 
clamour, because they had lost the man who, 
next to Mardonius, was held in the greatest es¬ 
teem, both by the king and by the Persians gen¬ 
erally. So the barbarians, after their own fash¬ 
ion, paid honours to the dead Masistius. 

25. The Greeks, on the other hand, were 
greatly emboldened by what had happened, 
seeing that they had not only stood their 
ground against the attacks of the horse, but 
had even compelled them to beat a retreat. 
They therefore placed the dead body of Masis¬ 
tius upon a cart, and paraded it along the ranks 
of the army. Now the body was a sight which 
well deserved to be gazed upon, being re¬ 
markable both for stature and for beauty; and 
it was to stop the soldiers from leaving their 
ranks to look at it, that they resolved to carry 
it round. After this the Greeks determined to 
quit the high ground and go nearer Plataea, as 
the land there seemed far more suitable for an 
encampment than the country about Erythrae, 
particularly because it was better supplied with 
water. To this place therefore, and more es¬ 
pecially to a spring-head which was called Gar- 
gaphia, they considered that it would be best 
for them to remove, after which they might 
once more encamp in their order. So they took 
their arms, and proceeded along the slopes of 
Cithaeron, past Hysiae, to the territory of the 
Plataeans; and here they drew themselves up, 
nation by nation, close by the fountain Garga- 


phia, and the sacred precinct of the Hero An- 
drocrates, partly along some hillocks of no 
great height, and partly upon the level of the 
plain. 

26. Here, in the marshalling of the nations, 
a fierce battle of words arose between the 
Athenians and the Tegeans, both of whom 
claimed to have one of the wings assigned to 
them. On each side were brought forward the 
deeds which they had done, whether in earlier 
or in later times; and first the Tegeans urged 
their claim as follows:— 

“This post has been always considered our 
right, and not the right of any of the other al¬ 
lies, in all the expeditions which have been en¬ 
tered into conjointly by the Peloponnesians, 
both anciently and in later times. Ever since 
the Heraclida: made their attempt, after the 
death of Eurystheus, to return by force of arms 
into the Peloponnese, this custom has been ob¬ 
served. It was then that the right became ours, 
and this was the way in which we gained it:— 
When, in company with the Achaeans and lo- 
nians who then dwelt in the Peloponnese, we 
marched out to the Isthmus, and pitched our 
camp over against the invaders, then, as the 
tale goes, that Hyllus made proclamation, say¬ 
ing—‘It needs not to imperil two armies in a 
general battle; rather let one be chosen from 
the Peloponnesian ranks, whomsoever they 
deem the bravest, and let him engage with me 
in single combat, on such terms as shall be 
agreed upon.’ The saying pleased the Pelopon¬ 
nesians, and oaths were sworn to the effect fol¬ 
lowing:—‘If Hyllus conquer the Peloponnesi¬ 
an champion, the Heraclidae shall return to 
their inheritance; if, on the other hand, he be 
conquered, the Heraclidae shall withdraw, lead 
back their army, and engage for the next hun¬ 
dred years to make no further endeavours to 
force their return.” Hereupon Echemus, the 
son of Aeropus and grandson of Phegeus, who 
was our leader and king, offered himself, and 
was preferred before all his brothers-in-arms 
as champion, engaged in single combat with 
Hyllus, and slew him upon the spot. For this 
exploit we were rewarded by the Peloponnesi¬ 
ans of that day with many goodly privileges, 
which we have ever since enjoyed; and, among 
the rest, we obtained the right of holding the 
leading post in one wing, whenever a joint ex¬ 
pedition goes forth beyond our borders. With 
you then, O Lacedaemonians, we do not claim 
to compete; choose you which wing ye please; 
we yield and grant you the preference: but we 
maintain that the command of the other wing 




294 HERODOTUS [Book ix 


belongs of right to us, now no less than for¬ 
merly. Moreover, set aside this exploit which 
we have related, and still our title to the chief 
post is better than that of the Athenians: wit¬ 
ness the many glorious fights in which we have 
been engaged against yourselves, O Spartans! 
as well as those which we have maintained 
with others. We have therefore more right to 
this place than they; for they have performed 
no exploits to be compared to ours, whether 
we look to earlier or to later times.” 

27. Thus spake the Tegeans; and the Athe¬ 
nians made reply as follows:—“We are not 
ignorant that our forces were gathered here, 
not for the purpose of speech-making, but for 
battle against the barbarian. Yet as the Tegeans 
have been pleased to bring into debate the ex¬ 
ploits performed by our two nations, alike in 
earlier and in later times, we have no choice 
but to set before you the grounds on which we 
claim it as our heritage, deserved by our un¬ 
changing bravery, to be preferred above Ar¬ 
cadians. In the first place, then, those very 
Heraclidse, whose leader they boast to have 
slain at the Isthmus, and whom the other 
Greeks would not receive when they asked a 
refuge from the bondage wherewith they were 
threatened by the people of Mycenae, were giv¬ 
en a shelter by us; and we brought down the 
insolence of Eurystheus, and helped to gain 
the victory over those who were at that time 
lords of the Peloponnese. Again, when the Ar- 
gives led their troops with Polynices against 
Thebes, and were slain and refused burial, it is 
our boast that we went out against the Cad- 
meians, recovered the bodies, and buried them 
at Eleusis in our own territory. Another noble 
deed of ours was that against the Amazons, 
when they came from their seats upon the 
Thermodon, and poured their hosts into At¬ 
tica; and in the Trojan war too we were not a 
whit behind any of the Greeks. But what boots 
it to speak of these ancient matters.^ A nation 
which was brave in those days might have 
grown cowardly since, and a nation of cowards 
then might now be valiant. Enough therefore 
of our ancient achievements. Had we per¬ 
formed no other exploit than that at Marathon 
—though in truth we have performed exploits 
as many and as noble as any of the Greeks— 
yet had we performed no other, we should de¬ 
serve this privilege, and many a one beside. 
There we stood alone, and singly fought with 
the Persians; nay, and venturing on so dan¬ 
gerous a cast, we overcame the enemy, and 
conquered on that day forty and six nations! 


Does not this one achievement suffice to make 
good our title to the post we claim Neverthe¬ 
less, Lacedaemonians, as to strive concerning 
place at such a time as this is not right, we are 
ready to do as ye command, and to take our 
station at whatever part of the line, and face 
whatever nation ye think most expedient. 
Wheresoever ye place us, ’twill be our en¬ 
deavour to behave as brave men. Only declare 
your will, and we shall at once obey you.” 

28. Such was the reply of the Athenians; 
and forthwith all the Lacedaemonian troops 
cried out with one voice, that the Athenians 
were worthier to have the left wing than the 
Arcadians. In this way were the Tegeans over¬ 
come; and the post was assigned to the Athe¬ 
nians. 

When this matter had been arranged, the 
Greek army, which was in part composed of 
those who came at the first, in part of such as 
had flocked in from day to day, drew up in the 
following order:—Ten thousand Lacedaemoni¬ 
an troops held the right wing, five thousand of 
whom were Spartans; and these five thousand 
were attended by a body of thirty-five thou¬ 
sand Helots, who were only lightly armed— 
seven Helots to each Spartan. The place next 
to themselves the Spartans gave to the Tege¬ 
ans, on account of their courage and of the es¬ 
teem in which they held them. They were all 
fully armed, and numbered fifteen hundred 
men. Next in order came the Corinthians, five 
thousand strong; and with them Pausanias 
had placed, at their request, the band of three 
hundred which had come from Potidara in 
Pallene. The Arcadians of Orchomenus, in 
number six hundred, came next; then the Sicy- 
onians, three thousand; then the Epidaurians, 
eight hundred; then the Trcezenians, one 
thousand; then the Lepreats, two hundred; the 
Mycenaeans and Tirynthians, four hundred; 
the Phliasians, one thousand; the Hermioni- 
ans, three hundred; the Eretrians and Styre- 
ans, six hundred; the Chalcideans, four hun¬ 
dred; and the Ambraciots, five hundred. After 
these came the Leucadians and Anactorians, 
who numbered eight hundred; the Paleans of 
Cephallenia, two hundred; the Eginetans, five 
hundred; the Megarians, three thousand; and 
the Plataeans, six hundred. Last of all, but first 
at their extremity of the line, were the Athe¬ 
nians, who, to the number of eight thousand, 
occupied the left wing, under the command of 
Aristides, the son of Lysimachus. 

29. All these, except the Helots—seven of 
whom, as I said, attended each Spartan—were 




THE HISTORY 295 


I heav’y-armed troops; and they amounted to 
' thirty-eight thousand seven hundred men. 

I This was the number of Hoplites, or heavy- 
I armed soldiers, which was brought together 
J against the barbarian. The light-armed troops 
j consisted of the thirty-five thousand ranged 
I with the Spartans, seven in attendance upon 
I each, who were all well equipped for war; and 
I of thirty-four thousand five hundred others, 

I belonging to the Lacedaemonians and the rest 
I of the Greeks, at the rate (nearly) of one light 
to one heavy armed. Thus the entire number 
of the light-armed was sixty-nine thousand 
five hundred. 

30. The Greek army, therefore, which mus¬ 
tered at Plataea, counting light-armed as well 
as heavy-armed, was but eighteen hundred 
men short of one hundred and ten thousand; 
and this amount was exactly made up by the 
Thespians who were present in the camp; for 
eighteen hundred Thespians, being the whole 
number left, were likewise with the army; but 
these men were without arms. Such was the 
array of the Greek troops when they took post 
on the Asopus. 

31. The barbarians under Mardonius, when 
the mourning for Masistius was at an end, and 
they learnt that the Greeks were in the Plata-an 
territory, moved likewise towards the river 
Asopus, which flows in those parts. On their 
arrival Mardonius marshalled them against 
the Greeks in the following order:—Against 
the Lacedaemonians he posted his Persians; 
and as the Persians were far more numerous 

j he drew them up with their ranks deeper than 
I common, and also extended their front so that 
part faced the Tegeans; and here he took care 
to choose out the best troops to face the Lace¬ 
daemonians, whilst against the Tegeans he ar¬ 
rayed those on whom he could not so much 
depend. This was done at the suggestion and 
by the advice of the Thebans. Next to the Per¬ 
sians he placed the Medes, facing the Corin¬ 
thians, Potidaeans, Orchomenians, and Sicyo- 
nians; then the Bactrians, facing the Epidauri- 
ans, Troezenians, Lepreats, Tirynthians, My- 
cenaeans, and Phliasians; after them the Indi¬ 
ans, facing the Hermionians, Eretrians, Styre- 
ans, and Chalcidians; then the Sacans, facing 
the Ambraciots, Anactorians, Leucadians, Pa- 
leans, and Eginetans; last of all, facing the 
Athenians, the Plataeans, and the Megarians, 
I he placed the troops of the Boeotians, Locrians, 

I Malians, and Thessalians, and also the thou¬ 
sand Phocians. The whole nation of the Pho- 
I cians had not joined the Medes; on the con¬ 


trary, there were some who had gathered 
themselves into bands about Parnassus, and 
made expeditions from thence, whereby they 
distressed Mardonius and the Greeks who 
sided with him, and so did good service to the 
Grecian cause. Besides those mentioned above, 
Mardonius likewise arrayed against the Athe¬ 
nians the Macedonians and the tribes dwelling 
about Thessaly. 

32. I have named here the greatest of the na¬ 
tions which were marshalled by Mardonius on 
this occasion, to wit, all those of most renown 
and account. Mixed with these, however, were 
men of divers other peoples, as Phrygians, 
Thracians, Mysians, Pxonians, and the like; 
Ethiopians again, and Egyptians, both of the 
Hermotybian and Calasirian races, whose 
weapon is the sword, and who are the only 
fighting men in that country. These persons 
had formerly served on board the fleet of Xer¬ 
xes, but Mardonius disembarked them before 
he left Phalerum; in the land force which Xer¬ 
xes brought to Athens there were no Egyp¬ 
tians. The number of the barbarians, as I have 
already mentioned, was three hundred thou¬ 
sand; that of the Greeks who had made alli¬ 
ance with Mardonius is known to none, for 
they were never counted: I should guess that 
they mustered near fifty thousand strong. The 
troops thus marshalled were all foot soldiers. 
As for the horse, it was drawn up by itself. 

33. When the marshalling of Mardonius’ 
troops by nations and by maniples was ended, 
the two armies proceeded on the next day to 
offer sacrifice. The Grecian sacrifice was of¬ 
fered by Tisamenus, the son of Antiochus, who 
accompanied the army as soothsayer: he was 
an Elean, and belonged to the Clytiad branch 
of the lamidae, but had been admitted among 
their own citizens by the Lacedaemonians. 
Now his admission among them was on this 
wise:—Tisamenus had gone to Delphi to con¬ 
sult the god concerning his lack of offspring, 
when it was declared to him by the Pythoness 
that he would win five very glorious combats. 
Misunderstanding the oracle, and imagining 
that he was to win combats in the games, Tisa¬ 
menus at once applied himself to the practice 
of gymnastics. He trained himself for the Pen- 
tathlum, and, on contending at Olympia, came 
within a little of winning it; for he was suc¬ 
cessful in everything, except the wrestling- 
match, which was carried off by Hieronymus 
the Andrian. Hereon the Lacedaemonians per¬ 
ceived that the combats of which the oracle 
spoke were not combats in the games, but bat- 






296 HERODOTUS [Book ix 


ties: they therefore sought to induce Tisa- 
menus to hire out his services to them, in or¬ 
der that they might join him with their Hera- 
cleid kings in the conduct of their wars. He 
however, when he saw that they set great store 
by his friendship, forthwith raised his price, 
and told them, “If they would receive him 
among their citizens, and give him equal 
rights with the rest, he was willing to do as they 
desired, but on no other terms would they ever 
gain his consent.” The Spartans, when they 
heard this, at first thought it monstrous, and 
ceased to implore his aid. Afterwards, how¬ 
ever, when the fearful danger of the Persian 
war hung over their heads, they sent for him 
and agreed to his terms; but Tisamenus now, 
perceiving them so changed, declared, “He 
could no longer be content with what he had 
asked before: they must likewise make his 
brother Hagias a Spartan, with the same rights 
as himself.” 

34. In acting thus he did but follow the ex¬ 
ample once set by Melampus, at least if king- 
ship may be compared with citizenship. For 
when the women of Argos were seized with 
madness, and the Argives would have hired 
Melampus to come from Pylos and heal them 
of their disease, he demanded as his reward 
one-half of the kingdom; but as the Argives 
disdained to stoop to this, they left him and 
went their way. Afterwards, however, when 
many more of their women were seized, they 
brought themselves to agree to his terms; and 
accordingly they went again to him, and said 
they were content to give what he required. 
Hereon Melampus, seeing them so changed, 
raised his demand, and told them, “Except 
they would give his brother Bias one-third of 
the kingdom likewise, he would not do as they 
wished.” So, as the Argives were in a strait, 
they consented even to this. 

35. In like manner the Spartans, as they 
were in great need of Tisamenus, yielded ev¬ 
erything: and Tisamenus the Elean, having in 
this way become a Spartan citizen, afterwards, 
in the capacity of soothsayer, helped the Spar¬ 
tans to gain five very glorious combats. He and 
his brother were the only men whom the Spar¬ 
tans ever admitted to citizenship. The five 
combats were these following:—The first was 
the combat at Plata^a; the second, that near 
Tegea, against the Tegeans and the Argives; 
the third, that at Dipseeis, against all the Ar¬ 
cadians excepting those of Mantinea; the 
fourth, that at the Isthmus, against the Mes- 
senians; and the fifth, that at Tanagra, against 


the Athenians and the Argives. The battle here 
fought was the last of all the five. 

36. The Spartans had now brought Tisa¬ 
menus with them to the Platsean territory, 
where he acted as soothsayer for the Greeks. 
He found the victims favourable, if the Greeks 
stood on the defensive, but not if they began 
the battle or crossed the river Asopus. 

37. With Mardonius also, who was very 
eager to begin the battle, the victims were not 
favourable for so doing; but he likewise found 
them bode him well, if he was content to stand 
on his defence. He too had made use of the 
Grecian rites; for Hegesistratus, an Elean, and 
the most renowned of the Telliads, was his 
soothsayer. This man had once been taken cap¬ 
tive by the Spartans, who, considering that he 
had done them many grievous injuries, laid 
him in bonds, with the intent to put him to 
death. Thereupon Hegesistratus, finding him¬ 
self in so sore a case, since not only was his life 
in danger, but he knew that he would have to 
suffer torments of many kinds before his death, 

—Hegesistratus, I say, did a deed for which no 
words suffice. He had been set with one foot in 
the stocks, which were of wood but bound 
with iron bands; and in this condition received 
from without an iron implement, wherewith 
he contrived to accomplish the most courage¬ 
ous deed upon record. Calculating how much 
of his foot he would be able to draw through 
the hole, he cut off the front portion with his 
own hand; and then, as he was guarded by 
watchmen, forced a way through the wall of 
his prison, and made his escape to Tegea, trav¬ 
elling during the night, but in the daytime 
stealing into the woods, and staying there. In 
this way, though the Lacedaemonians went out 
in full force to search for him, he nevertheless 
escaped, and arrived the third evening at Te¬ 
gea. So the Spartans were amazed at the man’s 
endurance, when they saw on the ground the 
piece which he had cut off his foot, and yet for , 
all their seeking could not find him anywhere. 
Hegesistratus, having thus escaped the Lace¬ 
daemonians, took refuge in Tegea; for the . 
Tegeans at that time were ill friends with the .l 
L acedaemonians. When his wound was healed, 
he procured himself a wooden foot, and be¬ 
came an open enemy to Sparta. At the last, 
however, this enmity brought him to trouble; .1, 
for the Spartans took him captive as he was ,, 
exercising his oflBce in Zacynthus, and forth- . 
with put him to death. But these things hap- ^ 
pened some while after the fight at Plataea. At 
present he was serving Mardonius on the Aso- ^ 



34-42 ] THE HISTORY 297 


• pus, having been hired at no inconsiderable 
price; and here he offered sacrifice with a right 
good will, in part from his hatred of the Lace- 
dxmonians, in part for lucre’s sake. 

38. So when the victims did not allow either 
the Persians or their Greek allies to begin the 
battle—these Greeks had their own soothsayer 
in the person of Hippomachus, a Leucadian— 
and when soldiers continued to pour into the 
opposite camp and the numbers on the Greek 
side to increase continually, Timagenidas, the 
son of Herpys, a Theban, advised Mardonius 
to keep a watch on the passes of Cithaeron, tell¬ 
ing him how supplies of men kept flocking in 
day after day, and assuring him that he might 
cut off large numbers. 

39. It was eight days after the two armies 
first encamped opposite to one another when 
this advice was given by Timagenidas. Mar¬ 
donius, seeing it to be good, as soon as evening 
came, sent his cavalry to that pass of Mount 
Cithaeron which opens out upon Platxa, a pass 
called by the Bcrotians the “Three Heads,’’ but 
called the “Oak-Heads” by the Athenians. The 
horse sent on this errand did not make the 
movement in vain. They came upon a body of 
five hundred sumpter-beasts which were just 
entering the plain, bringing provisions to the 
Greek camp from the Peloponnese, with a 
number of men driving them. Seeing this prey 
in their power, the Persians set upon them and 
slaughtered them, sparing none, neither man 
nor beast; till at last, when they had had 
enough of slaying, they secured such as were 
left, and bore them off to the camp to Mar¬ 
donius. 

40. After this they waited again for two 
days more, neither army wishing to begin the 
fight. The barbarians indeed advanced as far 
as the Asopus, and endeavoured to tempt the 
Greeks to cross; but neither side actually 
passed the stream. Still the cavalry of Mardoni¬ 
us harassed and annoyed the Greeks incessant¬ 
ly; for the Thebans, who were zealous in the 
cause of the Medes, pressed the war forward 
with all eagerness, and often led the charge till 
the lines met, when the Medes and Persians 
took their place, and displayed, many of them, 
uncommon valour. 

41. For ten days nothing was done more 
than this; but on the eleventh day from the 
time when the two hosts first took station, one 
over against the other, near Plataea—the num¬ 
ber of the Greeks being now much greater 

t than it was at the first, and Mardonius being 

' impatient of the delay—there was a conference 


held between Mardonius, son of Gobryas, and 
Artabazus, son of Pharnaces, a man who was 
esteemed by Xerxes more than almost any of 
the Persians. At this consultation the following 
were the opinions delivered:—Artabazus 
thought it would be best for them to break up 
from their quarters as soon as possible, and 
withdraw the whole army to the fortified town 
of Thebes, where they had abundant stores of 
corn for themselves, and of fodder for the 
sumpter-beasts. There, he said, they had only 
to sit quiet, and the war might be brought to 
an end on this wise:—Coined gold was plenti¬ 
ful in the camp, and uncoined gold too; they 
had silver moreover in great abundance, and 
drinking-cups. Let them not spare to take of 
these, and distribute them among the Greeks, 
especially among the leaders in the several cit¬ 
ies; ’twould not be long before the Greeks gave 
up their liberty, without risking another bat¬ 
tle for it. Thus the opinion of Artabazus 
agreed with that of the Thebans; for he too had 
more foresight than some. Mardonius, on the 
other hand, expressed himself with more 
fierceness and obstinacy, and was utterly disin¬ 
clined to yield. “Their army,” he said, “was 
vastly superior to that of the Greeks; and they 
had hest engage at once, and not wait till great¬ 
er numbers were gathered against them. As 
for Hegesistratus and his victims, they should 
let them pass unheeded, not seeking to force 
them to be favourable, but, according to the 
old Persian custom, hasting to join battle.” 

42. When Mardonius had thus declared his 
sentiments, no one ventured to say him nay; 
and accordingly his opinion prevailed, for it 
was to him, and not to Artabazus, that the 
king had given the command of the army. 

Mardonius now sent for the captains of the 
squadrons, and the leaders of the Greeks in 
his service, and questioned them:—“Did they 
know of any prophecy which said that the 
Persians were to be destroyed in Greece?” All 
were silent; some because they did not know 
the prophecies, but others, who knew them full 
well, because they did not think it safe to speak 
out. So Mardonius, when none answered, 
said, “Since ye know of no such oracle, or do 
not dare to speak of it, I, who know it well, 
will myself declare it to you. There is an ora¬ 
cle which says that the Persians shall come into 
Greece, sack the temple at Delphi, and when 
they have so done, perish one and all. Now we, 
as we are aware of the prediction, will neither 
go against the temple nor make any attempt 
to sack it: we therefore shall not perish for this 





298 HERODOTUS [Book ix 


trespass. Rejoice then thus far, all ye who are 
well-wishers to the Persians, and doubt not we 
shall get the better of the Greeks.” When he 
had so spoken, he further ordered them to pre¬ 
pare themselves, and to put all in readiness for 
a battle upon the morrow. 

43. As for the oracle of which Mardonius 
spoke, and which he referred to the Persians, 
it did not, I am well assured, mean them, but 
the Illyrians and the Enchelean host. There 
are, however, some verses of Bacis which did 
speak of this battle:— 

By Thermodon^s stream, and the grass-clad banhj 
of AsopHS, 

See where gather the Grecians, and hark^ to the 
foreigners^ war-shout— 

There in death shall lie, ere fate or Lachesis 
doomed him. 

Many a bow-bearing Mede, when the day of 
calam ity co m eth . 

These verses, and some others like them which 
Musaeus wrote, referred, I well know, to the 
Persians. The river Thermodon flows between 
Tanagra and Glisas. 

44. After Mardonius had put his question 
about the prophecies, and spoken the above 
words of encouragement, night drew on apace, 
and on both sides the watches were set. As 
soon then as there was silence throughout the 
camp,—the night being now well advanced, 
and the men seeming to be in their deepest 
sleep,—Alexander, the son of Amyntas, king 
and leader of the Macedonians, rode up on 
horseback to the Athenian outposts, and de¬ 
sired to speak with the generals. Hereupon, 
while the greater part continued on guard, 
some of the watch ran to the chiefs, and told 
them, “There had come a horseman from the 
Median camp who would not say a word, ex¬ 
cept that he wished to speak with the generals, 
of whom he mentioned the names.” 

45. They at once, hearing this, made haste 
to the outpost, where they found Alexander, 
who addressed them as follows:— 

“Men of Athens, that which I am about to 
say I trust to your honour; and I charge you to 
keep it secret from all excepting Pausanias, if 
you would not bring me to destruction. Had 
I not greatly at heart the common welfare of 
Greece, I should not have come to tell you; 
but I am myself a Greek by descent, and I 
would not willingly see Greece exchange free¬ 
dom for slavery. Know then that Mardonius 
and his army cannot obtain favourable omens; 
had it not been for this, they would have 
fought with you long ago. Now, however, they 


have determined to let the victims pass un¬ 
heeded, and, as soon as day dawns, to engage 
in battle. Mardonius, I imagine, is afraid that, 
if he delays, you will increase in number. Make 
ready then to receive him. Should he however 
still defer the combat, do you abide where you 
are; for his provisions will not hold out many 
more days. If ye prosper in this war, forget not 
to do something for my freedom; consider the 
risk I have run, out of zeal for the Greek cause, 
to acquaint you with what Mardonius intends, 
and to save you from being surprised by the 
barbarians. I am Alexander of Macedon.” 

As soon as he had said this, Alexander rode 
back to the camp, and returned to the station 
assigned him. 

46. Meanwhile the Athenian generals has¬ 
tened to the right wing, and told Pausanias all 
that they had learnt from Alexander. Here¬ 
upon Pausanias, who no sooner heard the in¬ 
tention of the Persians than he was struck with 
fear, addressed the generals, and said,— 

“Since the battle is to come with to-morrow’s 
dawn, it were well that you Athenians should 
stand opposed to the Persians, and we Spartans 
to the Bceotians and the other Greeks; for ye 
know the Medes and their manner of fight, 
since ye have already fought with them once 
at Marathon, but we are quite ignorant and 
without any experience of their warfare. 
While, however, there is not a Spartan here 
present who has ever fought against a Mede, 
of the Boeotians and Thessalians we have had 
experience. Take then your arms, and march 
over to our post upon the right, while we sup¬ 
ply your place in the left wing.” 

Hereto the Athenians replied—“We, too, 
long ago, when we saw that the Persians were 
drawn up to face you, were minded to suggest 
to you the very course which you have now 
been the first to bring forward. We feared, 
however, that perhaps our words might not 
be pleasing to you. But, as you have now spok¬ 
en of these things yourselves, we gladly give 
our consent, and are ready to do as ye have 
said.” 

47. Both sides agreeing hereto, at the dawn 
of day the Spartans and Athenians changed 
places. But the movement was perceived by the 
Boeotians, and they gave notice of it to Mar¬ 
donius; who at once, on hearing what had been 
done, made a change in the disposition of his 
own forces, and brought the Persians to face 
the Lacedaemonians. Then Pausanias, finding 
that his design was discovered, led back his 
Spartans to the right wing; and Mardonius, 




43 - 52 ] THE HISTORY 299 


seeing this, replaced his Persians upon the left 
of his army. 

48. When the troops again occupied their 
former posts, Mardonius sent a herald to the 
Spartans, who spoke as follows:— 

“Lacedamonians, in these parts the men say 
that you are the bravest of mankind, and ad¬ 
mire you because you never turn your backs 
in flight nor quit your ranks, but always stand 
firm, and either die at your posts or else des¬ 
troy your adversaries. But in all this which 
they say concerning you there is not one word 
of truth; for now have we seen you, before 
battle was joined or our two hosts had come 
to blows, flying and leaving your posts, wish¬ 
ing the Athenians to make the first trial of our 
arms, and taking your own station against our 
slaves. Surely these are not the deeds of brave 
men. Much do we find ourselves deceived in 
you; for we believed the reports of you that 
reached our ears, and expected that you would 
send a herald with a challenge to us, proposing 
to fight by yourselves against our division of 
native Persians. We for our part were ready to 
have agreed to this; but ye have made us no 
such offer—nay! ye seem rather to shrink from 
meeting us. However, as no challenge of this 
kind comes from you to us, lo! we send a chal¬ 
lenge to you. Why should not you on the part 
of the Greeks, as you are thought to be the 
bravest of all, and we on the part of the bar¬ 
barians, fight a battle with equal numbers on 
both sides Then, if it seems good to the oth¬ 
ers to fight likewise, let them engage after¬ 
wards—but if not,—if they are content that 
we should fight on behalf of all, let us so do— 
and whichever side wins the battle, let them 
win it for their whole army.” 

49. When the herald had thus spoken, he 
waited a while, but, as no one made him any 
answer, he went back, and told Mardonius 
what had happened. Mardonius was full of joy 
thereat, and so puffed up by the empty victory, 
that he at once gave orders to his horse to 
charge the Greek line. Then the horsemen 
drew near, and with their javelins and their ar¬ 
rows—for though horsemen they used the bow 
—sorely distressed the Greek troops, which 
could not bring them to close combat. The 
fountain of Gargaphia, whence the whole 
Greek army drew its water, they at this time 
choked up and spoiled. The Lacedaemonians 
were the only troops who had their station near 
this fountain; the other Greeks were more or 
less distant from it, according to their place in 
the line; they however were not far from the 


Asopus. Still, as the Persian horse with their 
missile weapons did not allow them to ap¬ 
proach, and so they could not get their water 
from the river, these Greeks, no less than the 
Lacedaemonians, resorted at this time to the 
fountain. 

50. When the fountain was choked, the 
Grecian captains, seeing that the army had no 
longer a water-place, and observing moreover 
that the cavalry greatly harassed them, held a 
meeting on these and other matters at the head¬ 
quarters of Pausanias upon the right. For be¬ 
sides the above-named difficulties, which were 
great enough, other circumstances added to 
their distress. All the provisions that they had 
brought with them were gone; and the attend¬ 
ants who had been sent to fetch supplies from 
the Peloponnese, were prevented from return¬ 
ing to camp by the Persian horse, which had 
now closed the passage. 

51. The captains therefore held a council, 
whereat it was agreed, that if the Persians did 
not give battle that day, the Greeks should 
move to the Island—a tract of ground which 
lies in front of Plataea, at the distance of ten 
furlongs from the Asopus and fount Garga¬ 
phia, where the army was encamped at that 
time. This tract was a sort of island in the 
continent: for there is a river which, dividing 
near its source, runs down from Mount Cithae- 
ron into the plain below in two streams, flow¬ 
ing in channels about three furlongs apart, 
which after a while unite and become one. 
The name of this river is Oeroe, and the dwell¬ 
ers in those parts call it, the daughter of the 
Asopus. This was the place to which the 
Greeks resolved to remove; and they chose it, 
first because they would there have no lack of 
water, and secondly, because the horse could 
not harass them as when it was drawn up right 
in their front. They thought it best to begin 
their march at the second watch of the night, 
lest the Persians should see them as they left 
their station, and should follow and harass 
them with their cavalry. It was agreed like¬ 
wise, that after they had reached the place, 
which the Asopus-born Oeroe surrounds, as it 
flows down from Cithaeron, they should des¬ 
patch, the very same night, one half of their 
army towards that mountain-range, to relieve 
those whom they had sent to procure pro¬ 
visions, and who were now blocked up in that 
region. 

52. Having made these resolves, they con¬ 
tinued during that whole day to suffer beyond 
measure from the attacks of the enemy’s 




300 HERODOTUS [Book ix 


horse. At length when towards dusk the 
attacks of the horse ceased, and, night having 
closed in, the hour arrived at which the army 
was to commence its retreat, the greater num¬ 
ber struck their tents and began the march 
towards the rear. They were not minded, how¬ 
ever, to make for the place agreed upon; but 
in their anxiety to escape from the Persian 
horse, no sooner had they begun to move than 
they fled straight to Plataea; where they took 
post at the temple of Juno, which lies outside 
the city, at the distance of about twenty fur¬ 
longs from Gargaphia; and here they pitched 
their camp in front of the sacred building. 

53. As soon as Pausanias saw a portion of 
the troops in motion, he issued orders to the 
Lacedaemonians to strike their tents and fol¬ 
low those who had been the first to depart, sup¬ 
posing that they were on their march to the 
place agreed upon. All the captains but one 
were ready to obey his orders: Amompharetus, 
however, the son of Poliadas, who was leader 
of the Pitanate cohort, refused to move, saying, 
“He for one would not fly from the strangers, 
or of his own will bring disgrace upon Sparta.” 
It had happened that he was absent from the 
former conference of the captains; and so what 
was now taking place astonished him. Pausa¬ 
nias and Euryanax thought it a monstrous 
thing that Amompharetus would not hearken 
to them; but considered that it would be yet 
more monstrous, if, when he was so minded, 
they were to leave the Pitanates to their fate; 
seeing that, if they forsook them to keep their 
agreement with the other Greeks, Amom¬ 
pharetus and those with him might perish. On 
this account, therefore, they kept the Lace¬ 
daemonian force in its place, and made every 
endeavour to persuade Amompharetus that he 
was wrong to act as he was doing. 

54. While the Spartans were engaged in 
these efforts to turn Amompharetus—the only 
man unwilling to retreat either in their own 
army or in that of the Tegeans—the Athenians 
on their side did as follows. Knowing that it 
was the Spartan temper to say one thing and 
do another, they remained quiet in their sta¬ 
tion until the army began to retreat, when they 
despatched a horseman to see whether the 
Spartans really meant to set forth, or whether 
after all they had no intention of moving. The 
horseman was also to ask Pausanias what he 
wished the Athenians to do. 

55. The herald on his arrival found the 
Lacedaemonians drawn up in their old posi¬ 
tion, and their leaders quarrelling with one 


another. Pausanias and Euryanax had gone on 
urging Amompharetus not to endanger the 
lives of his men by staying behind while the 
others drew off, but without succeeding in 
persuading him; until at last the dispute had 
waxed hot between them just at the moment 
when the Athenian herald arrived. At this 
point Amompharetus, who was still disputing, 
took up with both his hands a vast rock, and 
placed it at the feet of Pausanias, saying— 
“With this pebble I give my vote not to run 
away from the strangers.” (By “strangers” he 
meant barbarians.) Pausanias, in reply, called 
him a fool and a madman, and, turning to the 
Athenian herald, who had made the inquiries 
with which he was charged, bade him tell his 
countrymen how he was occupied, and ask 
them to approach nearer, and retreat or not ac¬ 
cording to the movements of the Spartans. 

56. So the herald went back to the Atheni¬ 
ans; and the Spartans continued to dispute till 
morning began to dawn upon them. Then 
Pausanias, who as yet had not moved, gave the 
signal for retreat—expecting (and rightly, as 
the event proved) that Amompharetus, when 
he saw the rest of the Lacedaemonians in mo¬ 
tion, would be unwilling to be left behind. No 
sooner was the signal given, than all the army 
except the Pitanates began their march, and 
retreated along the line of the hills; the Tege¬ 
ans accompanying them. The Athenians like¬ 
wise set off in good order, but proceeded by a 
different way from the Lacedaemonians. For 
while the latter clung to the hilly ground and 
the skirts of Mount Cithacron, on account of 
the fear which they entertained of the enemy’s 
horse, the former betook themselves to the low 
country and marched through the plain. 

57. As for Amompharetus, at first he did 
not believe that Pausanias would really dare 
to leave him behind; he therefore remained 
firm in his resolve to keep his men at their 
post; when, however, Pausanias and his troops 
were now some way off, Amompharetus, 
thinking himself forsaken in good earnest, or¬ 
dered his band to take their arms, and led 
them at a walk towards the main army. Now 
the army was waiting for them at a distance 
of about ten furlongs, having halted upon the 
river Moloeis at a place called Argiopius, 
where stands a temple dedicated to Eleusinian 
Ceres. They had stopped here, that, in case 
Amompharetus and his band should refuse to 
quit the spot where they were drawn up, and 
should really not stir from it, they might have 
it in their power to move back and lend them 



53-6i] the history 301 


assistance. Amompharetus, however, and his 
companions rejoined the main body; and at the 
same time the whole mass of the barbarian 
cavalry arrived and began to press hard upon 
them. The horsemen had followed their usual 
practice and ridden up to the Greek camp, 
when they discovered that the place where the 
Greeks had been posted hitherto was deserted. 
Hereupon they pushed forward without stop¬ 
ping, and, as soon as they overtook the enemy, 
pressed heavily on them. 

58. Mardonius, when he heard that the 
Greeks had retired under cover of the night, 
and beheld the place, where they had been 
stationed, empty, called to him Thorax of La¬ 
rissa, and his brethren, Eurypylus and Thrasi- 
deius, and said:— 

“O sons of Aleuas! what will ye say now, 
when ye see yonder place empty Why, you, 
who dwell in their neighbourhood, told me 
the Lacedaemonians never fled from battle, but 
were brave beyond all the rest of mankind. 
Lately, however, you yourselves beheld them 
change their place in the line; and here, as all 
may see, they have run away during the night. 
Verily, when their turn came to fight with 
those who are of a truth the bravest warriors 
in all the world, they showed plainly enough 
that they are men of no worth, who have dis¬ 
tinguished themselves among Greet^s —men 
likewise of no worth at all. However, I can 
readily excuse you, who, knowing nothing of 
the Persians, praised these men from your ac¬ 
quaintance with certain exploits of theirs; but 
I marvel all the more at Artabazus, that he 
should have been afraid of the Lacedaemoni¬ 
ans, and have therefore given us so dastardly a 
counsel,—bidding us, as he did, break up our 
camp, and remove to Thebes, and there allow 
ourselves to be besieged by the Greeks—advice 
whereof I shall take care to inform the king. 
But of this hereafter. Now we must not allow 
them to escape us, but must pursue after them 
till we overtake them; and then we must exact 
vengeance for all the wrongs which have been 
suffered at their hands by the Persians.” 

59. When he had so spoken, he crossed the 
Asopus, and led the Persians forward at a run 
directly upon the track of the Greeks, whom 
he believed to be in actual flight. He could not 
see the Athenians; for, as they had taken the 
way of the plain, they were hidden from his 
sight by the hills; he therefore led on his troops 
against the Lacedaemonians and the Tegeans 
only. When the commanders of the other divi¬ 
sions of the barbarians saw the Persians pur¬ 


suing the Greeks so hastily, they all forthwith 
seized their standards, and hurried after at 
their best speed in great disorder and disarray. 
On they went with loud shouts and in a wild 
rout, thinking to swallow up the runaways. 

60. Meanwhile Pausanias had sent a horse¬ 
man to the Athenians, at the time when the 
cavalry first fell upon him, with this mes¬ 
sage:— 

“Men of Athens! now that the great strug¬ 
gle has come, which is to decide the freedom 
or the slavery of Greece, we twain, Lacedne- 
monians and Athenians, are deserted by all the 
other allies, who have fled away from us dur¬ 
ing the past night. Nevertheless, we are re¬ 
solved what to do—we must endeavour, as 
best we may, to defend ourselves and to suc¬ 
cour one another. Now, had the horse fallen 
upon you first, we ourselves with the Tegeans 
(who remain faithful to the Greek cause) 
would have been bound to render you assist¬ 
ance against them. As, however, the entire 
body has advanced upon us, ’tis your place to 
come to our aid, sore pressed as we are by the 
enemy. Should you yourselves be so straitened 
that you cannot come, at least send us your 
archers, and he sure you will earn our grati¬ 
tude. We acknowledge that throughout this 
whole war there has been no zeal to be com¬ 
pared to yours—we therefore doubt not that 
you will do us this service.” 

61. The Athenians, as soon as they received 
this message, were anxious to go to the aid of 
the Spartans, and to help them to the uttermost 
of their power; but, as they were upon the 
march, the Greeks on the king’s side, whose 
place in the line had been opposite theirs, fell 
upon them, and so harassed them by their at¬ 
tacks that it was not possible for them to give 
the succour they desired. Accordingly the Lace¬ 
daemonians, and the Tegeans—whom nothing 
could induce to quit their side—were left alone 
to resist the Persians. Including the light¬ 
armed, the number of the former was 50,000; 
while that of the Tegeans was 3000. Now, 
therefore, as they were about to engage with 
Mardonius and the troops under him, they 
made ready to offer sacrifice. The victims, 
however, for some time were not favourable; 
and, during the delay, many fell on the Spar¬ 
tan side, and a still greater number were 
wounded. For the Persians had made a ram¬ 
part of their wicker shields, and shot from be¬ 
hind them such clouds of arrows, that the Spar¬ 
tans were sorely distressed. The victims con¬ 
tinued unpropitious; till at last Pausanias 



I 

302 HERODOTUS [Book ix 


raised his eyes to the Heraeum of the Plateaus, 
and calling the goddess to his aid, besought her 
not to disappoint the hopes of the Greeks. 

62. As he offered his prayer, the Tegeans, 
advancing before the rest, rushed forward 
against the enemy; and the Lacedaemonians, 
who had obtained favourable omens the mo¬ 
ment that Pausanias prayed, at length, after 
their long delay, advanced to the attack; while 
the Persians, on their side, left shooting, and 
prepared to meet them. And first the combat 
was at the wicker shields. Afterwards, when 
these were swept down, a fierce contest took 
place by the side of the temple of Ceres, which 
lasted long, and ended in a hand-to-hand 
struggle. The barbarians many times seized 
hold of the Greek spears and brake them; for 
in boldness and warlike spirit the Persians 
were not a whit inferior to the Greeks; but they 
were without bucklers, untrained, and far be¬ 
low the enemy in respect of skill in arms. 
Sometimes singly, sometimes in bodies of ten, 
now fewer and now more in number, they 
dashed upon the Spartan ranks, and so per¬ 
ished. 

63. The fight went most against the Greeks, 
where Mardonius, mounted upon a white 
horse, and surrounded by the bravest of all the 
Persians, the thousand picked men, fought in 
person. So long as Mardonius was alive, this 
body resisted all attacks, and, while they de¬ 
fended their own lives, struck down no small 
number of Spartans; but after Mardonius fell, 
and the troops with him, which were the main 
strength of the army, perished, the remainder 
yielded to the Lacedaemonians, and took to 
flight. Their light clothing, and want of buck¬ 
lers, were of the greatest hurt to them: for they 
had to contend against men heavily armed, 
while they themselves were without any such 
defence. 

64. Then was the warning of the oracle ful¬ 
filled; and the vengeance which was due to the 
Spartans for the slaughter of Leonidas was 
paid them by Mardonius—then too did Pau¬ 
sanias, the son of Cleombrotus, and grandson 
of Anaxandridas (I omit to recount his other 
ancestors, since they are the same with those 
of Leonidas), win a victory exceeding in glory 
all those to which our knowledge extends. 
Mardonius was slain by Aeimnestus, a man fa¬ 
mous in Sparta—the same who in the Mes- 
senian war, which came after the struggle 
against the Medes, fought a battle near Steny- 
clerus with but three hundred men against the 
whole force of the Messenians, and himself 


perished, and the three hundred with him. 

65. The Persians, as soon as they were put 
to flight by the Lacedaemonians, ran hastily 
away, without preserving any order, and took 
refuge in their own camp, within the wooden 
defence which they had raised in the Theban 
territory. It is a marvel to me how it came to 
pass, that although the battle was fought quite 
close to the grove of Ceres, yet not a single 
Persian appears to have died on the sacred soil, 
nor even to have set foot upon it, while round 1 
about the precinct, in the unconsecrated 
ground, great numbers perished. I imagine— 

if it is lawful, in matters which concern the ' 
gods, to imagine anything—that the goddess j 
herself kept them out, because they had burnt 
her dwelling at Eleusis. Such, then, was the 
issue of this battle. 

66. Artabazus, the son of Pharnaces, who 1 
had disapproved from the first of the king’s I 
leaving Mardonius behind him, and had made 
great endeavours, but all in vain, to dissuade 
Mardonius from risking a battle, when he 
found that the latter was bent on acting other¬ 
wise than he wished, did as follows. He had a 
force under his orders which was far from in- 1 
considerable, amounting, as it did, to near forty ^ 
thousand men. Being well aware, therefore, i 
how the battle was likely to go, as soon as the ■ 
two armies began to fight, he led his soldiers 1 
forward in an orderly array, bidding them one j 
and all proceed at the same pace, and follow ( 
him with such celerity as they should observe I 
him to use. Having issued these commands, he 1 
pretended to lead them to the battle. But when, 
advancing before his army, he saw that the 
Persians were already in flight, instead of keep¬ 
ing the same order, he wheeled his troops sud¬ 
denly round, and beat a retreat; nor did he 
even seek shelter within the palisade or behind 
the walls of Thebes, but hurried on into Pho- 
cis, wishing to make his way to the Hellespont 
with all possible speed. Such accordingly was 
the course which these Persians took. 

67. As for the Greeks upon the king’s side, 
while most of them played the coward pur¬ 
posely, the Boeotians, on the contrary, had a 
long struggle with the Athenians. Those of 
the Thebans who were attached to the Medes, 
displayed especially no little zeal; far from 
playing the coward, they fought with such i 
fury that three hundred of the best and bravest 
among them were slain by the Athenians in 
this passage of arms. But at last they too were ' 
routed, and fled away—not, however, in the 
same direction as the Persians and the crowd 




62-71 ] THE HISTORY 303 


of allies, who, having taken no part in the bat¬ 
tle, ran off without striking a blow—but to the 
city of Thebes. 

68. To me it shows very clearly how com¬ 
pletely the rest of the barbarians were depend¬ 
ent upon the Persian troops, that here they all 
fled at once, without ever coming to blows 
with the enemy, merely because they saw the 
Persians running away. And so it came to pass 
that the whole army took to flight, except only 
the horse, both Persian and Boeotian. These 
did good service to the flying foot-men, by ad¬ 
vancing close to the enemy, and separating 
between the Greeks and their own fugitives. 

69. The victors however pressed on, pursu¬ 
ing and slaying the remnant of the king’s 
army. 

Meantime, while the flight continued, tid¬ 
ings reached the Greeks who were drawn up 
round the Heraeum, and so were absent from 
the battle, that the fight was begun, and that 
Pausanias was gaining the victory. Hearing 
this, they rushed forward without any order, 
the Corinthians taking the upper road across 
the skirts of Cithaeron and the hills, which led 
straight to the temple of Ceres; while the Me- 
garians and Phliasians followed the level route 
through the plain. These last had almost 
reached the enemy, when the Theban horse 
espied them, and, observing their disarray, des¬ 
patched against them the squadron of which 
Asopodorus, the son of Timander, was captain. 
Asopodorus charged them with such effect 
that the left six hundred of their number dead 
upon the plain, and, pursuing the rest, com¬ 
pelled them to seek shelter in Cithaeron. So 
these men perished without honour. 

70. The Persians, and the multitude with 
them, who fled to the wooden fortress, were 
able to ascend into the towers before the Lace¬ 
daemonians came up. Thus placed, they pro¬ 
ceeded to strengthen the defences as well as 
they could; and when the Lacedaemonians ar¬ 
rived, a sharp fight took place at the rampart. 
So long as the Athenians were away, the bar¬ 
barians kept off their assailants, and had much 
the best of the combat, since the Lacedaemoni¬ 
ans were unskilled in the attack of walled 
places: but on the arrival of the Athenians, a 
more violent assault was made, and the wall 
was for a long time attacked with fury. In the 
end the valour of the Athenians and their 
perseverance prevailed—they gained the top of 
the wall, and, breaking a breach through it, 
enabled the Greeks to pour in. The first to en¬ 
ter here were the Tegeans, and they it was who 


plundered the tent of Mardonius; where 
among other booty the found the manger from 
which his horses ate, all made of solid brass, 
and well worth looking at. This manger was 
given by the Tegeans to the temple of Minerva 
Alea, while the remainder of their booty was 
brought into the common stock of the Greeks. 
As soon as the wall was broken down, the bar¬ 
barians no longer kept together in any array, 
nor was there one among them who thought 
of making further resistance—in good truth, 
they were all half dead with fright, huddled 
as so many thousands were into so narrow and 
confined a space. With such tameness did they 
submit to be slaughtered by the Greeks, that 
of the 300,000 men who composed the army— 
omitting the 40,000 by whom Artabazus was 
accompanied in his flight—no more than 3000 
outlived the battle. Of the Lacedaemonians 
from Sparta there perished in this combat 
ninety-one; of the Tegeans, sixteen; of the 
Athenians, fifty-two. ‘ 

71. On the side of the barbarians, the great¬ 
est courage was manifested, among the foot- 
soldiers, by the Persians; among the horse, by 
the Sacae; while Mardonius himself, as a man, 
bore off the palm from the rest. Among the 
Greeks, the Athenians and the Tegeans fought 
well; but the prowess shown by the Lacedae¬ 
monians was beyond either. Of this I have but 
one proof to offer—since all the three nations 
overthrew the force opposed to them—and 
that is, that the Lacedaemonians fought and 
conquered the best troops. The bravest man by 
far on that day was, in my judgment, Aristo- 
demus—the same who alone escaped from the 
slaughter of the three hundred at Thermopylae, 
and who on that account had endured disgrace 
and reproach: next to him were Posidonius, 
Philocyon, and Amompharetus the Spartan. 
The Spartans, however, who took part in the 
fight, when the question of “who had dis¬ 
tinguished himself most,” came to be talked 
over among them, decided—“that Aristode- 
mus, who, on account of the blame which at¬ 
tached to him, had manifestly courted death, 
and had therefore left his place in the line and 
behaved like a madman, had done of a truth 
very notable deeds; but that Posidonius, who, 
witli no such desire to lose his life, had quitted 
himself no less gallantly, was by so much a 
braver man than he.” Perchance, however, it 
was envy that made them speak after this sort. 
Of those whom I have named above as slain 
in this battle, all, save and except Aristodemus, 
received public honours: Aristodemus alone 


304 HERODOTUS IBook ix 


had no honours, because he courted death for 
the reason which I have mentioned. 

72. These then were the most distinguished 
of those who fought at Plataea. As for Calli¬ 
crates,—the most beautiful man, not among 
the Spartans only, but in the whole Greek 
camp,—he was not killed in the battle; for it 
was while Pausanias was still consulting the 
victims, that as he sat in his proper place in the 
line, an arrow struck him on the side. While 
his comrades advanced to the fight, he was 
borne out of the ranks, very loath to die, as he 
showed by the words which he addressed to 
Arimnestus, one of the Plataeans;—“I grieve,” 
said he, “not because I have to die for my 
country, but because I have not lifted my arm 
against the enemy, nor done any deed worthy 
of me, much as I have desired to achieve some¬ 
thing.” 

73. The Athenian who is said to have dis¬ 
tinguished himself the most was Sophanes, the 
son of Eutychides, of the Deceleian canton. 
The men of this canton, once upon a time, did 
a deed, which (as the Athenians themselves 
confess) has ever since been serviceable to 
them. When the Tyndaridse, in days of yore, 
invaded Attica with a mighty army to recover 
Helen, and, not being able to find out whither 
she had been carried, desolated the cantons,— 
at this time, they say, the Deceleians (or De- 
celus himself, according to some), displeased 
at the rudeness of Theseus, and fearing that 
the whole territory would suffer, discovered 
everything to the enemy, and even showed 
them the way to Aphidnae, which Titacus, a 
native of the place, betrayed into their hands. 
As a reward for this action, Sparta has always, 
from that time to the present, allowed the De¬ 
celeians to be free from all dues, and to have 
seats of honour at their festivals; and hence 
too, in the war which took place many years 
after these events between the Peloponnesians 
and the Athenians, the Lacedaemonians, while 
they laid waste all the rest of Attica, spared the 
lands of the Deceleians. 

74. Of this canton was Sophanes, the Athe¬ 
nian, who most distinguished himself in the 
battle. Two stories are told concerning him: 
according to the one, he wore an iron anchor, 
fastened to the belt which secured his breast¬ 
plate by a brazen chain; and this, when he 
came near the enemy, he threw out; to the in¬ 
tent that, when they made their charge, it 
might be impossible for him to be driven from 
his post: as soon, however, as the enemy fled, 
his wont was to take up his anchor and join 


the pursuit. Such, then, is one of the said stor¬ 
ies. The other, which is contradictory to the 
first, relates that Sophanes, instead of having 
an iron anchor fastened to his breastplate, bore 
the device of an anchor upon his shield, which 
he never allowed to rest, but made to run 
round continually. 

75. Another glorious deed was likewise per¬ 
formed by this same Sophanes. At the time 
when the Athenians were laying siege to Egi- 
na, he took up the challenge of Eurybates the 
Argive, a winner of the Pentathlum, and slew ' 
him. The fate of Sophanes in after times was | 
the following: he was leader of an Athenian I 
army in conjunction with Leagrus, the son of I 
Glaucon, and in a battle with the Edonians 1 
near Datum, about the gold-mines there, he 
was slain, after displaying uncommon bravery. 

76. As soon as the Greeks at Plataea had 
overthrown the barbarians, a woman came 
over to them from the enemy. She was one of 
the concubines of Pharandates, the son of Te- 
aspes, a Persian; and when she heard that the 
Persians were all slain and that the Greeks had 
carried the day, forthwith she adorned herself 
and her maids with many golden ornaments, 
and with the bravest of the apparel that she ' 
had brought with her, and, alighting from her 
litter, came forward to the Lacedaemonians, ere 
the work of slaughter was well over. When 
she saw that all the orders were given by Pau¬ 
sanias, with whose name and country she was 
well acquainted, as she had oftentimes heard 
tell of them, she knew who he must be; where¬ 
fore she embraced his knees, and said— 

“O king of Sparta! save thy suppliant from 
the slavery that awaits the captive. Already I 
am beholden to thee for one service—the 
slaughter of these men, wretches who had no 
regard either for gods or angels. I am by birth 
a Coan, the daughter of Hegetoridas, son of 
Antagoras. The Persian seized me by force in 
Cos, and kept me against my will.” 

“Lady,” answered Pausanias, “fear nothing: 
as a suppliant thou art safe—and still more, if 
thou hast spoken truth, and Hegetoridas of 
Cos is thy father—for he is bound to me by 
closer ties of friendship than any other man in 
those regions.” 

When he had thus spoken, Pausanias placed 
the woman in the charge of some of the Eph- 
ors who were present, and afterwards sent her I 
to Egina, whither she had a desire to go. . 

77. About the time of this woman’s coming, 
the Mantineans arrived upon the field, and 
found that all was over, and that it was too late 1 



:- 82 l THE HISTORY 305 


to take any part in the battle. Greatly distressed 
hereat, they declared themselves to deserve a 
fine, as laggarts; after which, learning that a 
portion of the Medes had fled away under Ar- 
tabazus, they were anxious to go after them 
as far as Thessaly. The Lacedemonians how¬ 
ever would not suffer the pursuit; so they re¬ 
turned again to their own land, and sent the 
leaders of their army into banishment. Soon 
after the Mantineans, the Eleans likewise ar¬ 
rived, and showed the same sorrow; after 
which they too returned home, and banished 
their leaders. But enough concerning these na¬ 
tions. 

78. There was a man at Plataea among the 
troops of the Eginetans, whose name was Lam- 
pon; he was the son of Pytheas, and a person 
of the first rank among his countrymen. Now 
this Lampon went about this same time to 
Pausanias, and counselled him to do a deed of 
exceeding wickedness. “Son of Cleombrotus,” 
he said very earnestly, “what thou hast already 
done is passing great and glorious. By the fa¬ 
vour of Heaven thou hast saved Greece, and 
gained a renown beyond all the Greeks of 
whom we have any knowledge. Now then so 
finish thy work, that thine own fame may be 
increased thereby, and that henceforth barbari¬ 
ans may fear to commit outrages on the Gre¬ 
cians. When Leonidas was slain at Thermopy¬ 
lae, Xerxes and Mardonius commanded that he 
should be beheaded and crucified. Do thou the 
like at this time by Mardonius, and thou wilt 
have glory in Sparta, and likewise through the 
whole of Greece. For, by hanging him upon 
a cross, thou wilt avenge Leonidas, who was 
thy father’s brother.” 

79. Thus spake Lampon, thinking to please 
Pausanias; but Pausanias answered him—“My 
Eginetan friend, for thy foresight and thy 
friendliness I am much beholden to thee: but 
the counsel which thou hast offered is not good. 
First hast thou lifted me up to the skies, by thy 
praise of my country and my achievement; and 
then thou hast cast me down to the ground, by 
bidding me maltreat the dead, and saying that 
thus I shall raise myself in men’s esteem. Such 
doings befit barbarians rather than Greeks; and 
even in barbarians we detest them. On such 
terms then I could not wish to please the Egi¬ 
netans, nor those who think as they think— 
enough for me to gain the approval of my own 
countrymen, by righteous deeds as well as by 
righteous words. Leonidas, whom thou 
wouldst have me avenge, is, I maintain, abun¬ 
dantly avenged already. Surely the countless 


lives here taken are enough to avenge not him 
only, but all those who fell at Thermopylae. 
Come not thou before me again with such a 
speech, nor with such counsel; and thank my 
forbearance that thou art not now punished.” 
Then Lampon, having received this answer, 
departed, and went his way. 

80. After this Pausanias caused proclama¬ 
tion to be made, that no one should lay hands 
on the booty, but that the Helots should collect 
it and bring it all to one place. So the Helots 
went and spread themselves through the camp, 
wherein were found many tents richly adorned 
with furniture of gold and silver, many couch¬ 
es covered with plates of the same, and many 
golden bowls, goblets, and other drinking-ves¬ 
sels. On the carriages were bags containing sil¬ 
ver and golden kettles; and the bodies of the 
slain furnished bracelets and chains, and scy- 
mitars with golden ornaments—not to men¬ 
tion embroidered apparel, of which no one 
made any account. The Helots at this time 
stole many things of much value, which they 
sold in after times to the Eginetans; however, 
they brought in likewise no small quantity, 
chiefly such things as it was not possible for 
them to hide. And this was the beginning of 
the great wealth of the Eginetans, who bought 
the gold of the Helots as if it had been mere 
brass. 

81. When all the booty had been brought to¬ 
gether, a tenth of the whole was set apart for 
the Delphian god; and hence was made the 
golden tripod which stands on the bronze 
serpent with the three heads, quite close to the 
altar. Portions were also set apart for the gods 
of Olympia, and of the Isthmus; from which 
were made, in the one case, a bronze Jupiter 
ten cubits high; and in the other, a bronze 
Neptune of seven cubits. After this, the rest of 
the spoil was divided among the soldiers, each 
of whom received less or more according to 
his deserts; and in this way was a distribution 
made of the Persian concubines, of the gold, 
the silver, the beasts of burthen, and all the oth¬ 
er valuables. What special gifts were presented 
to those who had most distinguished them¬ 
selves in the battle, I do not find mentioned by 
any,one; but I should suppose that they must 
have had some gifts beyond the others. As for 
Pausanias, the portion which was set apart for 
him consisted of ten specimens of each kind of 
thing—women, horses, talents, camels, or 
whatever else there was in the spoil. 

82. It is said that the following circumstance 
happened likewise at this time. Xerxes, when 


306 


HERODOTUS 


[Book ix 


he fled away out of Greece, left his war-tent 
with Mardonius: when Pausanias, therefore, 
saw the tent with its adornments of gold and 
silver, and its hangings of divers colours, he 
gave commandment to the bakers and the 
cooks to make him ready a banquet in such 
fashion as was their wont for Mardonius. Then 
they made ready as they were bidden; and 
Pausanius, beholding the couches of gold and 
silver daintily decked out with their rich cover¬ 
tures, and the tables of gold and silver laid, 
and the feast itself prepared with all magnifi¬ 
cence, was astonished at the good things which 
were set before him, and, being in a pleasant 
mood, gave commandment to his own follow¬ 
ers to make ready a Spartan supper. When the 
suppers were both served, and it was apparent 
how vast a difference lay between the two, 
Pausanias laughed, and sent his servants to call 
to him the Greek generals. On their coming, 
he pointed to the two boards, and said:— 

“I sent for you, O Greeks, to show you the 
folly of this Median captain, who, when he en¬ 
joyed such fare as this, must needs come here 
to rob us of our penury.” 

Such, it is said, were the words of Pausanias 
to the Grecian generals. 

83. During many years afterwards, the Pla- 
taeans used often to find upon the field of bat¬ 
tle concealed treasures of gold, and silver, and 
other valuables. More recently they likewise 
made discovery of the following: the flesh hav¬ 
ing all fallen away from the bodies of the dead, 
and their bones having been gathered together 
into one place, the Plataeans found a skull with¬ 
out any seam, made entirely of a single bone; 
likewise a jaw, both the upper bone and the 
under, wherein all the teeth, front and back, 
were joined together and made of one bone; 
also, the skeleton of a man not less than five 
cubits in height. 

84. The body of Mardonius disappeared the 
day after the battle; but who it was that stole 
it away I cannot say with certainty. I have 
heard tell of a number of persons, and those 
too of many different nations, who are said to 
have given him burial; and I know that many 
have received large sums on this score from 
Artontes the son of Mardonius: but I cannot 
discover with any certainty which of them it 
was who really took the body away, and buried 
it. Among others, Dionysophanes, an Ephesi¬ 
an, is rumoured to have been the actual person. 

85. The Greeks, after sharing the booty 
upon the field of Platsa, proceeded to bury 
their own dead, each nation apart from the 


rest. The Lacedaemonians made three graves; 
in one they buried their youths, among whom 
were Posidonius, Amompharetus, Philocyon, 
and Callicrates;—in another, the rest of the 
Spartans; and in the third, the Helots. Such 
was their mode of burial. The Tegeans buried 
all their dead in a single grave; as likewise did 
the Athenians theirs, and the Megarians and 
Phliasians those who were slain by the horse. 
These graves, then, had bodies buried in them: 
as for the other tombs which are to be seen at 
Plataea, they were raised, as I understand, by 
the Greeks whose troops took no part in the 
battle; and who, being ashamed of themselves, 
erected empty barrows upon the field, to obtain 
credit with those who should come after them. 
Among others, the Eginetans have a grave 
there, which goes by their name; but which, as 
I learn, was made ten years later by Cleades, 
the son of Autodicus, a Plataean, at the request 
of the Eginetans, whose agent he was. 

86. After the Greeks had buried their dead 
at Plataea, they presently held a council, where¬ 
at it was resolved to make war upon Thebes, 
and to require that those who had joined the 
Medes should be delivered into their hands. 
Two men, who had been the chief leaders on 
the occasion, were especially named—to wit, 
Timagenidas and Attaginus. If the Thebans 
should refuse to give these men up, it was de¬ 
termined to lay siege to their city, and never 
stir from before it till it should surrender. Af¬ 
ter this resolve, the army marched upon The¬ 
bes; and having demanded the men, and been 
refused, began the siege, laying waste the coun¬ 
try all around, and making assaults upon the 
wall in divers places. 

87. When twenty days were gone by, and 
the violence of the Greeks did not slacken, 
Timagenidas thus bespake his countrymen— 

“Ye men of Thebes, since the Greeks have 
so decreed, that they will never desist from the 
siege till either they take Thebes or we are de¬ 
livered to them, we would not that the land 
of Boeotia should suffer any longer on our be¬ 
half. If it be money that they in truth desire, 
and their demand of us be no more than a pre¬ 
text, let money from the treasury of the state 
be given them; for the state, and not we alone, 
embraced the cause of the Medes. If, however, 
they really want our persons, and on that ac¬ 
count press this siege, we are ready to be de¬ 
livered to them and to stand our trial.” 

The Thebans thought this offer very right 
and seasonable; wherefore, they despatched a 
herald without any delay to Pausanias, and 


f 


I 

i 


I 







83-92 

told him they were willing to deliver up the 
men. 

88. As soon as an agreement had been con¬ 
cluded upon these terms, Attaginus made his 
escape from the city; his sons, however, were 
surrendered in his place; but Pausanias refused 
to hold them guilty, since children (he said) 
could have had no part in such an of?ence. The 
rest of those whom the Thebans gave up had 
expected to obtain a trial, and in that case their 
trust was to escape by means of bribery; but 
Pausanias, afraid of this, dismissed at once the 
whole army of allies, and took the men with 
him to Corinth, where he slew them all. Such 
were the events which hap[)ened at Platxa 
and at Thebes. 

89. Artabazus, the son of Pharnaces, who 
fled away from Plataea, was soon far sped on 
his journey. When he reached Thessaly, the 
inhabitants received him hospitably, and made 
inquiries of him concerning the rest of the 
army, since they were still altogether ignorant 
of what had taken place at Plataea: whereupon 
the Persian, knowing well that, if he told them 
the truth, he would run great risk of perishing 
himself, together with his whole army—for if 
the facts were once blazoned abroad, all who 
learnt them would he sure to fall upon him— 
the Persian, I say, considering this, as he had 
before kept all secret from the Phocians, so 
now answered the Thessalians after the fol¬ 
lowing fashion;— 

“I myself, Thessalians, am hastening, as ye 
see, into Thrace; and I am fain to use all possi¬ 
ble despatch, as I am sent with this force on 
special business from the main army. Mardoni- 
us and his host are close behind me, and may 
be looked for shortly. When he comes, receive 
him as ye have received me, and show him 
every kindness. Be sure ye will never hereafter 
regret it, if ye so do.” 

With these words he took his departure, and 
marched his troops at their best speed through 
Thessaly and Macedon straight upon Thrace, 
following the inland route, which was the 
shortest, and, in good truth, using all possible 
despatch. He himself succeeded in reaching 
Byzantium; but a great part of his army per¬ 
ished upon the road—many being cut to pieces 
by the Thracians, and others dying from hun¬ 
ger and excess of toil. From Byzantium Arta¬ 
bazus set sail, and crossed the strait; returning 
into Asia in the manner which has been here 
described. 

90. On the same day that the blow was 
struck at Plataea, another defeat befell the Per- 


307 

sians at Mycale in Ionia. While the Greek fleet 
under Leotychides the Lacedemonian was still 
lying inactive at Delos, there arrived at that 
place an embassy from Samos, consisting of 
three men, Lampon the son of Thrasycles, 
Athenagoras the son of Archestratidas, and 
Hegcsistratus the son of Aristagoras. The Sa¬ 
mians had sent them secretly, concealing their 
departure both from the Persians and from 
their own tyrant Theomestor, the son of An- 
drodamas, whom the Persians had made ruler 
of Samos. When the ambassadors came before 
the Greek captains Hegcsistratus took the 
word, and urged them with many and various 
arguments, saying, “that the lonians only 
needed to see them arrive in order to revolt 
from the Persians; and that the Persians would 
never abide their coming; or if they did, 
kwould be to oBer them the finest booty that 
they could anywhere expect to gain;” while at 
the same time he made appeal to the gods of 
their common worship, and besought them to 
deliver from bondage a Grecian race, and 
withal to drive back the barbarians. “This,” he 
said, “might very easily be done, for the Per¬ 
sian ships were bad sailers, and far from a 
match for theirs;” adding, moreover, “that if 
there was any suspicion lest the Samians in¬ 
tended to deal treacherously, they were them¬ 
selves ready to become hostages, and to return 
on board the ships of their allies to Asia.” 

91. When the Samian stranger continued 
importunately beseeching him, Leotychides, 
either because he wanted an omen, or by a 
mere chance, as God guided him, asked the 
man—“Samian stranger! prithee, tell me thy 
name.^” “Hegcsistratus (army-leader),” an¬ 
swered the other, and might have said more, 
but Leotychides stopped him hy exclaiming— 
“I accept, O Samian! the omen which thy 
name affords. Only, before thou goest back, 
swear to us, thyself and thy brother-envoys, 
that the Samians will indeed be our warm 
friends and allies.” 

92. No sooner had he thus spoken than he 
proceeded to hurry forward the business. The 
Samians pledged their faith upon the spot; and 
oaths of alliance were exchanged between 
them and the Greeks. This done, two of the 
ambassadors forthwith sailed away; as for He- 
gesistratus, Leotychides kept him to accom¬ 
pany his own fleet, for he considered his name 
to be a good omen. The Greeks abode where 
they were that day, and on the morrow sacri¬ 
ficed, and found the victims favourable. Their 
soothsayer was Deiphonus, the son of Evenius, 


THE HISTORY 


308 HERODOTUS [Book ix 


a man of Apollonia—I mean the Apollonia 
which lies upon the Ionian Gulf. 

93. A strange thing happened to this man’s 
father, Evenius. The Apolloniats have a flock 
of sheep sacred to the sun. During the day¬ 
time these sheep graze along the banks of the 
river which flows from Mount Lacmon 
through their territory and empties itself into 
the sea by the port of Oricus; while at night 
they are guarded by the richest and noblest of 
the citizens, who are chosen to serve the ofiice, 
and who keep the watch each for one year. 
Now the Apolloniats set great store by these 
sheep, on account of an oracle which they re¬ 
ceived concerning them. The place where they 
are folded at night is a cavern, a long way 
from the town. Here it happened that Evenius, 
when he was chosen to keep the watch, by 
some accident fell asleep upon his guard; and 
while he slept, the cave was entered by wolves, 
which destroyed some sixty of the flock under 
his care. Evenius, when he woke and found 
what had occurred, kept silence about it and 
told no one; for he thought to buy other sheep 
and put them in the place of the slain. But the 
matter came to the ears of the Apolloniats, who 
forthwith brought Evenius to trial, and con¬ 
demned him to lose his eyes, because he had 
gone to sleep upon his post. Now when Eve¬ 
nius was blinded, straightway the sheep had no 
young, and the land ceased to bear its wonted 
harvests. Then the Apolloniats sent to Do- 
dona, and to Delphi, and asked the prophets, 
what had caused the woes which so afflicted 
them. The answer which they received was 
this—“The woes were come for Evenius, the 
guardian of the sacred sheep, whom the Apol¬ 
loniats had wrongfully deprived of sight. They 
(the gods) had themselves sent the wolves; 
nor would they ever cease to exact vengeance 
for Evenius, till the Apolloniats made him 
whatever atonement he liked to ask. When 
this was paid, they would likewise give him a 
gift, which would make many men call him 
blessed.” 

94. Such was the tenor of the prophecies. 
The Apolloniats kept them close, but charged 
some of their citizens to go and make terms 
with Evenius; and these men managed the 
business for them in the way which I will now 
describe. They found Evenius sitting upon a 
bench, and, approaching him, they sat down 
by his side, and began to talk: at first they 
spoke of quite other matters, but in the end 
they mentioned his misfortune, and offered 
him their condolence. Having thus beguiled 


him, at last they put the question—“What | 
atonement would he desire, if the Apolloniats 
were willing to make him satisfaction for the ' 
wrong which they had done to him.^” Here- | 
upon Evenius, who had not heard of the ora- ' 
cle, made answer—“If I were given the lands 1 
of this man and that—” (here he named the 1 
two men whom he knew to have the finest | 
farms in Apollonia), “and likewise the house 
of this other”—(and here he mentioned the 
house which he knew to be the handsomest in 
the town), “I would, when master of these, be 
quite content, and my wrath would cease alto¬ 
gether.” As soon as Evenius had thus spoken, 
the men who sat by him rejoined—“Evenius, 
the Apolloniats give thee the atonement which 
thou hast desired, according to the bidding of 
the oracles.” Then Evenius understood the 
whole matter, and was enraged that they had 
deceived him so; but the Apolloniats bought 
the farms from their owners, and gave Evenius 
what he had chosen. After this was done, 
straightway Evenius had the gift of prophecy, 
insomuch that he became a famous man in 
Greece. 

95. Deiphonus, the son of this Evenius, had 
accompanied the Corinthians, and was sooth¬ 
sayer, as I said before, to the Greek armament. 
One account, however, which I have heard, 
declares that he was not really the son of this 
man, but only took the name, and then went 
about Greece and let out his services for hire. 

96. The Greeks, as soon as the victims were 
favourable, put to sea, and sailed across from 
Delos to Samos. Arriving off Calami, a place 
upon the Samian coast, they brought the fleet 
to an anchor near the temple of Juno which 
stands there, and prepared to engage the Per¬ 
sians by sea. These latter, however, no sooner 
heard of the approach of the Greeks, than, dis¬ 
missing the Phoenician ships, they sailed away 
with the remainder to the mainland. For it had 
been resolved in council not to risk a battle, 
since the Persian fleet was thought to be no 
match for that of the enemy. They fled, there- | 
fore, to the main, to be under the protection of 
their land army, which now lay at Mycale, and 
consisted of the troops left behind by Xerxes 
to keep guard over Ionia. This was an army of 
sixty thousand men, under the command of 
Tigranes, a Persian of more than common 
beauty and stature. The captains resolved 
therefore to betake themselves to these troops 
for defence, to drag their ships ashore, and to 
build a rampart around them, which might 
at once protect the fleet, and serve likewise as ' 




93-101 ] 

a place of refuge for themselves. 

97. Having so resolved, the commanders 
put out to sea; and passing the temple of the 
Eumenides, arrived at Gxson and Scolopoeis, 
which are in the territory of Mycale. Here 
is a temple of Eleusinian Ceres, built by Philis- 
tus the son of Pasicles who came to Asia with 
Neileus the son of Codrus, what time he 
founded Miletus. At this place they drew the 
ships up on the beach, and surrounded them 
with a rampart made of stones and trunks of 
trees, cutting down for this purpose all the 
fruit-trees which grew near, and defending the 
barrier by means of stakes firmly planted in 
the ground. Here they were prepared either to 
win a battle, or undergo a siege—their 
thoughts embracing both chances. 

98. The Greeks, when they understood that 
the barbarians had fled to the mainland, were 
sorely vexed at their escape: nor could they de¬ 
termine at first what they should do, whether 
they should return home, or proceed to the 
Hellespont. In the end, however, they resolved 
to do neither, but to make sail for the conti¬ 
nent. So they made themselves ready for a sea- 
fight by the preparation of boarding-bridges, 
and what else was necessary; provided with 
which they sailed to Mycale. Now when they 
came to the place where the camp was, they 
found no one venture out to meet them, but 
observed the ships all dragged ashore within 
the barrier, and a strong land-force drawn up 
in battle array upon the beach; Leotychides 
therefore sailed along the shore in his ship, 
keeping as close hauled to the land as possible, 
and by the voice of a herald thus addressed the 
lonians:— 

“Men of Ionia—ye who can hear me speak 
—do ye take heed to what I say; for the Per¬ 
sians will not understand a word that I utter. 
When we join battle with them, before aught 
else, remember Freedom—and next, recollect 
our watchword, which is Hebe. If there be any 
who hear me not, let those who hear report my 
words to the others.” 

In all this Leotychides had the very same de¬ 
sign which Themistocles entertained at Ar- 
temisium. Either the barbarians would not 
know what he had said, and the lonians would 
be persuaded to revolt from them; or if his 
words were reported to the former, they would 
mistrust their Greek soldiers. 

99. After Leotychides had made this ad¬ 
dress, the Greeks brought their ships to the 
land, and, having disembarked, arrayed them¬ 
selves for the battle. When the Persians saw 


309 

them marshalling their array, and bethought 
themselves of the advice which had been of¬ 
fered to the lonians, their first act was to dis¬ 
arm the Samians, whom they suspected of 
complicity with the enemy. For it had hap¬ 
pened lately that a number of the Athenians 
who lingered in Attica, having been made 
prisoners by the troops of Xerxes, were brought 
to Asia on board the barbarian fleet; and these 
men had been ransomed, one and all, by the 
Samians, who sent them back to Athens, well 
furnished with provisions for the way. On this 
account, as much as on any other, the Samians 
were suspected, as men who had paid the ran¬ 
som of five hundred of the king’s enemies. Af¬ 
ter disarming them, the Persians next des¬ 
patched the Milesians to guard the paths which 
lead up into the heights of Mycale, because 
(they said) the Milesians were well acquainted 
with that region: their true object, however, 
was to remove them to a distance from the 
camp. In this way the Persians sought to secure 
themselves against such of the lonians as they 
thought likely, if occasion offered, to make re¬ 
bellion. They then joined shield to shield, and 
so made themselves a breastwork against the 
enemy. 

100. The Greeks now, having finished their 
preparations, began to move towards the bar¬ 
barians; when, lo! as they advanced, a rumour 
flew through the host from one end to the 
other—that the Greeks had fought and con¬ 
quered the army of Mardonius in Bceotia. At 
the same time a herald’s wand was observed 
lying upon the beach. Many things prove to 
me that the gods take part in the affairs of 
man. How else, when the battles of Mycale and 
Plataea were about to happen on the self same 
day, should such a rumour have reached the 
Greeks in that region, greatly cheering the 
whole army, and making them more eager 
than before to risk their lives. 

101. A strange coincidence too it was, that 
both the battles should have been fought near 
a precinct of Eleusinian Ceres. The fight at 
Plataea took place, as I said before, quite close 
to one of Ceres’ temples; and now the battle 
at Mycale was to be fought hard by another. 
Rightly, too, did the rumour run, that the 
Greeks with Pausanias had gained their vic¬ 
tory; for the fight at Plataea fell early in the 
day, whereas that at Mycale was towards eve¬ 
ning. That the two battles were really fought 
on the same day of the same month became ap¬ 
parent when inquiries were made a short time 
afterwards. Before the rumour reached them. 


THE HISTORY 


310 


HERODOTUS 


\ Book ix 


the Greeks were full of fear, not so much on 
their own account, as for their countrymen, 
and for Greece herself, lest she should be 
worsted in her struggle with Mardonius. But 
when the voice fell on them, their fear van¬ 
ished, and they charged more vigorously and 
at a quicker pace. So the Greeks and the bar¬ 
barians rushed with like eagerness to the fray; 
for the Hellespont and the Islands formed the 
prize for which they were about to fight. 

102. The Athenians, and the force drawn 
up with them, who formed one half of the 
army, marched along the shore, where the 
country was low and level; but the way for the 
Lacedaemonians, and the troops with them, lay 
across hills and a torrent-course. Hence, while 
the Lacedaemonians were effecting their pas¬ 
sage round, the Athenians on the other wing 
had already closed with the enemy. So long as 
the wicker bucklers of the Persians continued 
standing, they made a stout defence, and had 
not even the worst of the battle; but when the 
Athenians, and the allies with them, wishing 
to make the victory their own, and not share 
it with the Lacedemonians, cheered each oth¬ 
er on with shouts, and attacked them with the 
utmost fierceness, then at last the face of things 
became changed. For, bursting through the 
line of shields, and rushing forwards in a 
body, the Greeks fell upon the Persians; who, 
though they bore the charge and for a long 
time maintained their ground, yet at length 
took refuge in their intrenchment. Here the 
Athenians themselves, together with those who 
followed them in the line of battle, the Corin¬ 
thians, the Sicyonians, and the Trcezenians, 
pressed so closely on the steps of their flying 
foes, that they entered along with them into 
the fortress. And now, when even their fort¬ 
ress was taken, the barbarians no longer of¬ 
fered resistance, but fled hastily away, all save 
only the Persians. They still continued to fight 
in knots of a few men against the Greeks, who 
kept pouring into the intrenchment. And here, 
while two of the Persian commanders fled, two 
fell upon the field: Artayntes and Ithamitres, 
who were leaders of the fleet, escaped; Mar- 
dontes, and the commander of the land force, 
Tigranes, died fighting. 

103. The Persians still held out, when the 
Lacedaemonians, and their part of the army, 
reached the camp, and joined in the remainder 
of the battle. The number of Greeks who fell 
in the struggle here was not small; the Sicyoni¬ 
ans especially lost many, and, among the rest, 
Perilaiis their general. 


The Samians, who served with the Medes, 
and who, although disarmed, still remained in 
the camp, seeing from the very beginning of 
the fight that the victory was doubtful, did all 
that lay in their power to render help to the 
Greeks. And the other lonians likewise, be¬ 
holding their example, revolted and attacked 
the Persians. 

104. As for the Milesians, who had been or¬ 
dered, for the better security of the Persians, to 
guard the mountain-paths,—that, in case any 
accident befell them such as had now hap¬ 
pened, they might not lack guides to conduct 
them into the high tracts of Mycale,—and who 
had also been removed to hinder them from 
making an outbreak in the Persian camp; they, 
instead of obeying their orders, broke them 
in every respect. For they guided the flying 
Persians by wrong roads, which brought them 
into the presence of the enemy; and at last they 
set upon them with their own hands, and 
showed themselves the hottest of their adver¬ 
saries. Ionia, therefore, on this day revolted a 
second time from the Persians. 

105. In this battle the Greeks who behaved 
with the greatest bravery were the Athenians; 
and among them the palm was borne off by 
Hermolycus, the son of Euthynus, a man ac¬ 
complished in the Pancratium. This Hermoly¬ 
cus was afterwards slain in the war between 
the Athenians and Carystians. He fell in the 
fight near Cyrnus in the Carystian territory, 
and was buried in the neighbourhood of Ger- 
aestus. After the Athenians, the most distin¬ 
guished on the Greek side were the Corinthi¬ 
ans, the Trcezenians, and the Sicyonians. 

106. The Greeks, when they had slaugh¬ 
tered the greater portion of the barbarians, 
either in the battle or in the rout, set fire to 
their ships and burnt them, together with the 
bulwark which had been raised for their de¬ 
fence, first however removing therefrom all 
the booty, and carrying it down to the beach. 
Besides other plunder, they found here many 
caskets of money. When they had burnt the 
rampart and the vessels, the Greeks sailed 
away to Samos, and there took counsel to¬ 
gether concerning the lonians, whom they 
thought of removing out of Asia. Ionia they 
proposed to abandon to the barbarians; and 
their doubt was, in what part of their own pos¬ 
sessions in Greece they should settle its inhabi¬ 
tants. For it seemed to them a thing impossible 
that they should be ever on the watch to guard 
and protect Ionia; and yet otherwise there 
could be no hope that the lonians would escape 


I 





I02-I10 

the vengeance of the Persians. Hereupon the 
Peloponnesian leaders proposed that the sea¬ 
port towns of such Cireeks as had sided with 
the Medes should be taken away from them, 
and made over to the lonians. The Athenians, 
on the other hand, were very unwilling that 
any removal at all should take place, and dis¬ 
liked the Peloponnesians holding councils con¬ 
cerning their colonists. So, as they set them¬ 
selves against the change, the Peloponnesians 
yielded with a good will. Hereupon the Sami¬ 
ans, Chians, Lesbians, and other islanders, who 
had helped the Greeks at this time, were re¬ 
ceived into the league of the allies; and took the 
oaths, binding themselves to be laithful, and 
not desert the common cause. Then the Greeks 
sailed away to the Hellespont, where they 
meant to break down the bridges, which they 
supposed to be still extended across the strait. 

107. The barbarians who escaped from the 
battle—a scanty remnant—took refuge in the 
heights of Mycale, whence they made good 
their retreat to Sardis. During the march, Ma- 
sistes, the son of Darius, who had been present 
at the disaster, had words with Artayntes, the 
general, on whom he showered many re¬ 
proaches. He called him, among other things, 
“worse than a woman,” for the way in which 
he had exercised his command, and said there 
was no punishment which he did not deserve to 
suffer for doing the king’s house such grievous 
hurt. Now with the Persians there is no greater 
insult than to call a man “worse than a wom¬ 
an.” So when Artayntes had borne the re¬ 
proaches for some while, at last he fell in a rage, 
and drew his scymitar upon Masistes, being 
fain to kill him. But a certain Halicarnassian, 
Xenagoras by name, the son of Praxilaiis, who 
stood behind Artayntes at the time, seeing him 
in the act of rushing forward, seized him sud¬ 
denly round the waist, and, lifting him from 
his feet, dashed him down upon the ground; 
which gave time for the spearmen who guard¬ 
ed Masistes to come to his aid. By his conduct 
here Xenagoras gained the favour, not of Ma¬ 
sistes only, but likewise of Xerxes himself, 
whose brother he had preserved from death; 
and the king rewarded his action by setting 
him over the whole land of Cilicia. Except this, 
nothing happened upon the road; and the men 
continued their march and came all safe to 
Sardis. At Sardis they found the king, who 
had been there ever since he lost the sea-fight 
and fled from Athens to Asia. 

108. During the time that Xerxes abode at 
this place, he fell in love with the wife of Ma- 


311 

sistes, who was likewise staying in the city. He 
therefore sent her messages, but failed to win 
her consent; and he could not dare to use vio¬ 
lence, out of regard to Masistes, his brother. 
This the woman knew well enough, and hence 
it was that she had the boldness to resist him. 
So Xerxes, finding no other way open, devised 
a marriage between his own son Darius and a 
daughter of this woman and Masistes—think¬ 
ing that he might better obtain his ends if he 
effected this union. Accordingly he betrothed 
these two persons to one another, and, after the 
usual ceremonies were completed, took his de¬ 
parture for Susa. When he was come there, 
and had received the woman into his palace 
as his son’s bride, a change came over him, and 
losing all love for the wife of Masistes, he con¬ 
ceived a passion for his son’s bride, Masistes' 
daughter. And Artaynta—for so was she called 
—very soon returned his love. 

109. After a while the thing was discovered 
in the way which I will now relate. Amestris, 
the wife of Xerxes, had woven with her own 
hands a long robe, of many colours, and very- 
curious, which she presented to her husband 
as a gift. Xerxes, who was greatly pleased with 
it, forthwith put it on; and went in it to visit 
Arta'ynta, who happened likewise on this day 
to please him greatly. He therefore bade her 
ask him whatever boon she liked, and prom¬ 
ised that, whatever it was, he would assuredly 
grant her request. Then Arta'ynta, who was 
doomed to suffer calamity together with her 
whole house, said to him—“Wilt thou indeed 
give me whatever 1 like to ask?” So the king, 
suspecting nothing less than that her choice 
would fall where it did, pledged his word, and 
swore to her. She then, as soon as she heard 
his oath, asked boldly for the robe. Hereupon 
Xerxes tried all possible means to avoid the 
gift; not that he grudged to give it, but because 
he dreaded Amestris, who already suspected, 
and would now, he feared, detect his love. So 
he offered her cities instead, and heaps of gold, 
and an army which should obey no other lead¬ 
er. (The last of these is a thoroughly Persian 
gift.) But, as nothing could prevail on Arta’yn- 
ta to change her mind, at the last he gave her 
the robe. Then Artaynta was very greatly re¬ 
joiced, and she often wore the garment and 
was proud of it. And so it came to the ears of 
Amestris that the robe had been given to her. 

no. Now when Amestris learnt the whole 
matter, she felt no anger against Arta'ynta; but, 
looking upon her mother, the wife of Masistes, 
as the cause of all the mischief, she determined 


THE HISTORY 






312 

to compass her death. She waited, therefore, 
till her husband gave the great royal banquet, 
a feast which takes place once every year, in 
celebration of the king's birthday—“Tykta” 
the feast is called in the Persian tongue, which 
in our language may be rendered “perfect”— 
and this is the only day in all the year on which 
the king soaps his head, and distributes gifts 
to the Persians. Amestris waited, accordingly, 
for this day, and then made request of Xerxes, 
that he would please to give her, as her present, 
the wife of Masistes. But he refused; for it 
seemed to him shocking and monstrous to give 
into the power of another a woman who was not 
only his brother’s wife, but was likewise wholly 
guiltless of what had happened—the more es¬ 
pecially as he knew well enough with what in¬ 
tent Amestris had preferred her request. 

III. At length, however, wearied by her 
importunity, and constrained moreover by the 
law of the feast, which required that no one 
who asked a boon that day at the king’s board 
should be denied his request, he yielded, but 
with a very ill will, and gave the woman into 
her power. Having so done, and told Amestris 
she might deal with her as she chose, the king 
called his brother into his presence, and said— 

“Masistes, thou art my brother, the son of 
my father Darius; and, what is more, thou art 
a good man. I pray thee, live no longer with 
the wife whom thou now hast. Behold, I will 
give thee instead my own daughter in mar¬ 
riage; take her to live with thee. But part first 
with the wife thou now hast—I like not that 
thou keep to her.” 

To this Masistes, greatly astonished, an¬ 
swered— 

“My lord and master, how strange a speech 
hast thou uttered! Thou biddest me put away 
my wife, who has borne me three goodly 
youths, and daughters besides, whereof thou 
hast taken one and espoused her to a son of 
thine own—thou biddest me put away this 
wife, notwithstanding that she pleases me 
greatly, and marry a daughter of thine! In 
truth, O king! that I am accounted worthy to 
wed thy daughter, is an honour which I might¬ 
ily esteem; but yet to do as thou sayest am 1 in 
no wise willing. I pray thee, use not force to 
compel me to yield to thy prayer. Be sure thy 
daughter will find a husband to the full as 
worthy as myself. Suffer me then to live on 
with my own wife.” 

Thus did Masistes answer; and Xerxes, in 
wrath, replied—“I will tell thee, Masistes, 
what thou hast gained by these words. I will 


[Book ix 

not give thee my daughter; nor shalt thou live ' 
any longer with thy own wife. So mayest thou • 
learn, in time to come, to take what is offered 
thee.” Masistes, when he heard this, withdrew, 
only saying—“Master, thou hast not yet taken 
my life.” 

112. While these things were passing be¬ 

tween Xerxes and his brother Masistes, Ames- : 
tris sent for the spearmen of the royal body¬ 
guard, and caused the wife of Masistes to be ^ 
mutilated in a horrible fashion. Her two 1 
breasts, her nose, ears, and lips were cut off ^ 
and thrown to the dogs; her tongue was torn * 
out by the roots, and thus disfigured she was , 
sent back to her home. i 

113. Masistes, who knew nothing of what I 
had happened, but was fearful that some ca- I 
lamity had befallen him, ran hastily to his 
house. There, finding his wife so savagely ' 
used, he forthwith took counsel with his sons, 
and, accompanied by them and certain others ' 
also, set forth on his way to Bactria, intending 
to stir up revolt in that province, and hoping 
to do great hurt to Xerxes; all which, I believe, 
he would have accomplished, if he had once 
reached the Bactrian and Sacan people; for he 
was greatly beloved by them both, and was 
moreover satrap of Bactria. But Xerxes, hear- 1 
ing of his designs, sent an armed force upon 
his track, and slew him while he was still upon 
the road, with his sons and his whole army. 1 
Such is the tale of King Xerxes’ love and of the 
death of his brother Masistes. 

114. Meanwhile the Greeks, who had left 
Mycale, and sailed for the Hellespont, were ' 
forced by contrary winds to anchor near Lee- 1 
turn; from which place they afterwards sailed 
on to Abydos. On arriving here, they discov¬ 
ered that the bridges, which they had thought 
to find standing, and which had been the chief 
cause of their proceeding to the Hellespont, 
were already broken up and destroyed. Upon 
this discovery, Leotychides, and the Pelopon¬ 
nesians under him, were anxious to sail back to 
Greece; but the Athenians, with Xanthippus 
their captain, thought good to remain, and 
resolved to make an attempt upon the Cher¬ 
sonese. So, while the Peloponnesians sailed 
away to their homes, the Athenians crossed 
over from Abydos to the Chersonese, and there 
laid siege to Sestos. 

115. Now, as Sestos was the strongest fort¬ 
ress in all that region, the rumour had no soon¬ 
er gone forth that the Greeks were arrived at 
the Hellespont, than great numbers flocked 
thither from all the towns in the neighbour- 


HERODOTUS 






I I I- 120 ] 

hood. Amon^ the rest there came a certain 
Giobazus, a Persian, from the city of Cardia, 
where he had laid up the shore-cables which 
had been used in the construction of the 
bridges. The town was guarded by its own 
/Eolian inhabitants, but contained also some 
I Persians, and a great multitude of their allies. 

’ ii6. The whole district was under the rule 
of Artayctes, one of the king’s satraps; who 
I was a Persian, but a wicked and cruel man. At 
! the time when Xerxes was marching against 
j Athens, he had craftily possessed himself of 
the treasures belonging to Protesilaiis the son 
of Iphiclus, which were at ELtsus in the 
j Chersonese. For at this place is the tomb of 

I Protesilaiis, surrounded by a sacred precinct; 

1 and here there was great store of wealth, vases 
of gold and silver, works in brass, garments, 
and other offerings, all which Artayctes made 
his prey, having got the king’s consent by thus 
cunningly addressing him— 

“Master, there is in this region the house of 
a Greek, who, when he attacked thy territory, 
met his due reward, and perished. Give me his 
house, I pray thee, that hereafter men may fear 
to carry arms against thy land.’’ 

By these words he easily persuaded Xerxes 
to give him the man’s house; for there was no 
suspicion of his design in the king’s mind. And 
he could say in a certain sense that Protesilaiis 
had borne arms against the land of the king; 
because the Persians consider all Asia to belong 
to them, and to their king for the time being. 
So when Xerxes allowed his request, he 
brought ail the treasures from Elaesus to Sestos, 
and made the sacred land into cornfields and 
pasture land; nay, more, whenever he paid a 
visit to Elaeus, he polluted the shrine itself by 
vile uses. It was this Artayctes who was now 
besieged by the Athenians—and he was but ill 
prepared for defence; since the Greeks had 
fallen upon him quite unawares, nor had he in 
the least expected their coming. 

117. When it was now late in the autumn, 
and the siege still continued, the Athenians be¬ 
gan to murmur that they were kept abroad so 
long; and, seeing that they were not able to 
take the place, besought their captains to lead 
them back to their own country. But the cap¬ 
tains refused to move, till either the city had 
fallen, or the Athenian people ordered them to 
return home. So the soldiers patiently bore up 
against their sufferings. 

118. Meanwhile those within the walls were 
reduced to the last straits, and forced even to 
boil the very thongs of their beds for food. At 


313 

last, when these too failed them, Artayctes and 
CEobazus, with the native Persians, fled away 
from the place by night, having let themselves 
down from the wall at the back of the town, 
where the blockading force was scantiest. As 
soon as day dawned, they of the Chersonese 
made signals to the Greeks from the walls, and 
let them know what had happened, at the 
same time throwing open the gates of their 
city. Hereupon, while some of the Greeks 
entered the town, others, and those the more 
numerous body, set out in pursuit of the enemy. 

119. CEobazus fled into Thrace; but there 
the Apsinthian Thracians seized him, and of¬ 
fered him, after their wonted fashion, to Plei- 
storus, one of the gods of their country. His 
companions they likewise put to death, but in 
a different manner. As for Artayctes and the 
troops with him, who had been the last to 
leave the town, they were overtaken by the 
Greeks, not far from /Egospotami, and de¬ 
fended themselves stoutly for a time, but were 
at last either killed or taken prisoners. Those 
whom they made prisoners the Greeks bound 
with chains, and brought with them to Sestos. 
Artayctes and his son were among the number. 

120. Now the Chersonesites relate that the 
following prodigy befell one of the Greeks 
who guarded the captives. He was broiling 
upon a fire some salted fish, when of a sudden 
they began to leap and quiver, as if they had 
been only just caught. Hereat, the rest of the 
guards hurried round to look, and were great¬ 
ly amazed at the sight. Artayctes, however, be¬ 
holding the prodigy, called the man to him, 
and said— 

“Fear not, Athenian stranger, because of this 
marvel. It has not appeared on thy account, 
but on mine. Protesilaiis of Elaeus has sent it to 
show me, that albeit he is dead and embalmed 
with salt, he has power from the gods to chas¬ 
tise his injurer. Now then I would fain acquit 
my debt to him thus. For the riches which I 
took from his temple, I will fix my fine at one 
hundred talents—while for myself and this boy 
of mine, I will give the Athenians two hun¬ 
dred talents, on condition that they will spare 
our lives.” 

Such were the promises of Artayctes; but 
they failed to persuade Xanthippus. For the 
men of Elaeus, who wished to avenge Protesi- 
laiis, entreated that he might be put to death; 
and Xanthippus himself was of the same mind. 
So they led Artayctes to the tongue of land 
where the bridges of Xerxes had been fixed— 
or, according to others, to the knoll above the 


THE HISTORY 








HERODOTUS 


314 

town of Madytus; and, having nailed him to 
a board, they left him hanging thereupon. As 
for the son of Artayctes, him they stoned to 
death before his eyes. 

121. This done, they sailed back to Greece, 
carrying with them, besides other treasures, 
the shore cables from the bridges of Xerxes, 
which they wished to dedicate in their tem¬ 
ples. And this was all that took place that year. 

122. It was the grandfather of the Artayctes, 
one Artembares by name, who suggested to the 
Persians a proposal which they readily em¬ 
braced, and thus urged upon Cyrus:—“Since 
Jove,” they said, “has overthrown Astyages, 
and given the rule to the Persians, and to thee 
chiefly, O Cyrus! come now, let us quit this 
land wherein we dwell—for it is a scant land 
and a rugged—and let us choose ourselves 
some other better country. Many such lie 


around us, some nearer, some further off: if 
we take one of these, men will admire us far 
more than they do now. Who that had the 
power would not so act.^ And when shall we 
have a fairer time than now, when we are 
lords of so many nations, and rule all Asia.^” 
Then Cyrus, who did not greatly esteem the 
counsel, told them,—“they might do so, if they 
liked—but he warned them not to expect in 
that case to continue rulers, but to prepare for 
being ruled by others—soft countries gave birth 
to soft men—there was no region which pro¬ 
duced very delightful fruits, and at the same 
time men of a warlike spirit.” So the Persians 
departed with altered minds, confessing that 
Cyrus was wiser than they; and chose rather to 
dwell in a churlish land, and exercise lordship, 
than to cultivate plains, and be the slaves of 
others. 

