The Fourth Book, Entitled 
MELPOMENE 


•»> «<» «<’ <«» «<’ «<’^^-< « -< « -<«-<«■ 


I. After the taking of Babylon, an expedition 
was led by Darius into Scythia. Asia abound¬ 
ing in men, and vast sums flowing into the 
treasury, the desire seized him to exact ven¬ 
geance from the Scyths, who had once in days 
gone by invaded Media, defeated those who 
met them in the field, and so begun the quarrel. 
During the space of eight-and-twenty years, as 
I have before mentioned, the Scyths continued 
lords of the whole of Upper Asia. They en¬ 
tered Asia in pursuit of the Cimmerians, and 
overthrew the empire of the Medes, who till 
they came possessed the sovereignty. On their 
return to their homes after the long absence of 
twenty-eight years, a task awaited them little 
less troublesome than their struggle with the 
Medes. They found an army of no small size 
prepared to oppose their entrance. For the 
Scythian women, when they saw that time 
went on, and their husbands did not come 
back, had intermarried with their slaves. 

2. Now the Scythians blind all their slaves, 
to use them in preparing their milk. The plan 
they follow is to thrust tubes made of bone, not 
unlike our musical pipes, up the vulva of the 
mare, and then to blow into the tubes with 
their mouths, some milking while the others 
blow. They say that they do this because when 
the veins of the animal are full of air, the udder 
is forced down. The milk thus obtained is 
poured into deep wooden casks, about which 
the blind slaves are placed, and then the milk 
is stirred round. That which rises to the top is 
drawn off, and considered the best part; the 
under portion is of less account. Such is the rea¬ 
son why the Scythians blind all those whom 
they take in war; it arises from their not being 
tillers of the ground, but a pastoral race. 

3. When therefore the children sprung from 
these slaves and the Scythian women grew to 
manhood, and understood the circumstances of 
their birth, they resolved to oppose the army 


which was returning from Media. And, first of 
all, they cut off a tract of country from the rest 
of Scythia by digging a broad dyke from the 
Tauric mountains to the vast lake of the Maeo- 
tis. Afterwards, when the Scythians tried to 
force an entrance, they marched out and en¬ 
gaged them. Many battles were fought, and 
the Scythians gained no advantage, until at last 
one of them thus addressed the remainder: 
“What are we doing, Scythians.'^ We are fight¬ 
ing our slaves, diminishing our own number 
when we fall, and the number of those that be¬ 
long to us when they fall by our hands. Take 
my advice—lay spear and bow aside, and let 
each man fetch his horsewhip, and go boldly 
up to them. So long as they see us with arms 
in our hands, they imagine themselves our 
equals in birth and bravery; but let them be¬ 
hold us with no other weapon but the whip, 
and they will feel that they are our slaves, and 
flee before us.” 

4. The Scythians followed this counsel, and 
the slaves were so astounded, that they forgot 
to fight, and immediately ran away. Such was 
the mode in which the Scythians, after being 
for a time the lords of Asia, and being forced 
to quit it by the Medes, returned and settled in 
their own country. This inroad of theirs it was 
that Darius was anxious to avenge, and such 
was the purpose for which he was now col¬ 
lecting an army to invade them. 

5. According to the account which the 
Scythians themselves give, they are the young¬ 
est of all nations. Their tradition is as follows. 
A certain Targitaiis was the first man who ever 
lived in their country, which before his time 
was a desert without inhabitants. He was a 
child—I do not believe the tale, but it is told 
nevertheless—of Jove and a daughter of the 
Borysthenes. Targitaiis, thus descended, begat 
three sons, Leipoxais, Arpoxais, and Colaxais, 
who was the youngest born of the three. While 




THE HISTORY 125 


they still ruled the land, there fell from the 
sky four implements, all of gold—a plough, a 
yoke, a battle-axe, and a drinking-cup. The 
eldest of the brothers perceived them first, and 
approached to pick them up; when lo! as he 
came near, the gold took fire, and blazed. He 
therefore went his way, and the second com¬ 
ing forward made the attempt, but the same 
thing happened again. The gold rejected both 
the eldest and the second brother. Last of all 
the youngest brother approached, and immedi¬ 
ately the flames were extinguished; so he 
picked up the gold, and carried it to his home. 
Then the two elder agreed together, and made 
the whole kingdom over to the youngest born. 

6. From Leipoxais sprang the Scythians of 
the race called Auchatae; from Arpoxais, the 
middle brother, those known as the Catiari 
and Traspians; from Colaxais, the youngest, 
the Royal Scythians, or Paralatae. All together 
they are named Scoloti, after one of their 
kings; the Greeks, however, call them Scythi¬ 
ans. 

7. Such is the account which the Scythians 
give of their origin. They add that from the 
time of Targitaiis, their first king, to the inva¬ 
sion of their country by Darius, is a period of 
one thousand years, neither less nor more. The 
Royal Scythians guard the sacred gold with 
most especial care, and year by year offer great 
sacrifices in its honour. At this feast, if the man 
who has the custody of the gold should fall 
asleep in the open air, he is sure (the Scythians 
say) not to outlive the year. His pay therefore 
is as much land as he can ride round on horse¬ 
back in a day. As the extent of Scythia is very 
great, Colaxais gave each of his three sons a 
separate kingdom, one of which was of ampler 
size than the other two: in this the gold was 
preserved. Above, to the northward of the far¬ 
thest dwellers in Scythia, the country is said to 
be concealed from sight and made impassable 
by reason of the feathers which are shed abroad 
abundantly. The earth and air are alike full of 
them, and this it is which prevents the eye 
from obtaining any view of the region. 

8. Such is the account which the Scythians 
give of themselves, and of the country which 
lies above them. The Greeks who dwell about 
the Pontus tell a different story. According to 
them, Hercules, when he was carrying off the 
cows of Geryon, arrived in the region which is 
now inhabited by the Scyths, but which was 
then a desert. Geryon lived outside the Pontus, 
in an island called by the Greeks Erytheia, 
near Gades, which is beyond the Pillars of Her¬ 


cules upon the Ocean. Now some say that the 
Ocean begins in the east, and runs the whole 
way round the world; but they give no proof 
that this is really so. Hercules came from 
thence into the region now called Scythia, and, 
being overtaken by storm and frost, drew his 
lion’s skin about him, and fell fast asleep. 
While he slept, his mares, which he had loosed 
from his chariot to graze, by some wonderful 
chance disappeared. 

9. On waking, he went in quest of them, 
and, after wandering over the whole country, 
came at last to the district called “the Wood¬ 
land,” where he found in a cave a strange be¬ 
ing, between a maiden and a serpent, whose 
form from the waist upwards was like that of 
a woman, while all below was like a snake. He 
looked at her wonderingly; but nevertheless 
inquired, whether she had chanced to see his 
strayed mares anywhere. She answered him, 
“Yes, and they were now in her keeping; but 
never would she consent to give them back, un¬ 
less he took her for his mistress.” So Hercules, 
to get his mares back, agreed; but afterwards 
she put him off and delayed restoring the 
mares, since she wished to keep him with her 
as long as possible. He, on the other hand, was 
only anxious to secure them and to get away. 
At last, when she gave them up, she said to 
him, “When thy mares strayed hither, it was 
I who saved them for thee: now thou hast paid 
their salvage; for lo! I bear in my womb three 
sons of thine. Tell me therefore when thy sons 
grow up, what must I do with them? Wouldst 
thou wish that I should settle them here in this 
land, whereof I am mistress, or shall I send 
them to thee?” Thus questioned, they say, 
Hercules answered, “When the lads have 
grown to manhood, do thus, and assuredly 
thou wilt not err. Watch them, and when thou 
seest one of them bend this bow as I now bend 
it, and gird himself with this girdle thus, 
choose him to remain in the land. Those who 
fail in the trial, send away. Thus wilt thou at 
once please thyself and obey me.” 

10. Hereupon he strung one of his bows— 
up to that time he had carried two—and 
showed her how to fasten the belt. Then he 
gave both bow and belt into her hands. Now 
the bdt had a golden goblet attached to its 
clasp. So after he had given them to her, he 
went his way; and the woman, when her chil¬ 
dren grew to manhood, first gave them sever¬ 
ally their names. One she called Agathyrsus, 
one Gelonus, and the other, who was the 
youngest. Scythes. Then she remembered the 


126 HERODOTUS [Book iv 


instructions she had received from Hercules, 
and, in obedience to his orders, she put her 
sons to the test. Two of them, Agathyrsus and 
Gelonus, proving unequal to the task enjoined, 
their mother sent them out of the land; Scyth¬ 
es, the youngest, succeeded, and so he was al¬ 
lowed to remain. From Scythes, the son of Her¬ 
cules, were descended the after kings of Scyth¬ 
ia; and from the circumstance of the goblet 
which hung from the belt, the Scythians to 
this day wear goblets at their girdles. This was 
the only thing which the mother of Scythes did 
for him. Such is the tale told by the Greeks 
who dwell around the Pontus. 

11. There is also another different story, 
now to be related, in which I am more inclined 
to put faith than in any other. It is that the 
wandering Scythians once dwelt in Asia, and 
there warred with the Massagetae, but with ill 
success; they therefore quitted their homes, 
crossed the Araxes, and entered the land of 
Cimmeria. For the land which is now inhabit¬ 
ed by the Scyths was formerly the country of 
the Cimmerians. On their coming, the natives, 
who heard how numerous the invading army 
was, held a council. At this meeting opinion 
was divided, and both parties stiffly main¬ 
tained their own view; but the counsel of the 
Royal tribe was the braver. For the others 
urged that the best thing to be done was to 
leave the country, and avoid a contest with so 
vast a host; but the Royal tribe advised remain¬ 
ing and fighting for the soil to the last. As 
neither party chose to give way, the one de¬ 
termined to retire without a blow and yield 
their lands to the invaders; but the other, re¬ 
membering the good things which they had 
enjoyed in their homes, and picturing to them¬ 
selves the evils which they had to expect if 
they gave them up, resolved not to flee, but 
rather to die and at least be buried in their 
fatherland. Having thus decided, they drew 
apart in two bodies, the one as numerous as the 
other, and fought together. All of the Royal 
tribe were slain, and the people buried them 
near the river Tyras, where their grave is still 
to be seen. Then the rest of the Cimmerians de¬ 
parted, and the Scythians, on their coming, 
took possession of a deserted land. 

12. Scythia still retains traces of the Cim¬ 
merians; there are Cimmerian castles, and a 
Cimmerian ferry, also a tract called Cimmeria, 
and a Cimmerian Bosphorus. It appears like¬ 
wise that the Cimmerians, when they fled into 
Asia to escape the Scyths, made a settlement 
in the peninsula where the Greek city of Si¬ 


nope was afterwards built. The Scyths, it is 
plain, pursued them, and missing their road, 
poured into Media. For the Cimmerians kept 
the line which led along the sea-shore, but the 
Scyths in their pursuit held the Caucasus upon 
their right, thus proceeding inland, and falling 
upon Media. This account is one which is com¬ 
mon both to Greeks and barbarians. 

13. Aristeas also, son of Caystrobius, a na¬ 
tive of Proconnesus, says in the course of his 
poem that wrapt in Bacchic fury he went as far 
as the Issedones. Above them dwelt the Ari- 
maspi, men with one eye; still further, the 
gold-guarding griffins; and beyond these, the 
Hyperboreans, who extended to the sea. Ex¬ 
cept the Hyperboreans, all these nations, be¬ 
ginning with the Arimaspi, were continually 
encroaching upon their neighbours. Hence it 
came to pass that the Arimaspi drove the Issedo- 
nians from their country, while the Issedonians 
dispossessed the Scyths; and the Scyths, pressing 
upon the Cimmerians, who dwelt on the shores 
of the Southern Sea, forced them to leave their 
land. Thus even Aristeas does not agree in his 
account of this region with the Scythians. 

14. The birthplace of Aristeas, the poet who 
sung of these things, I have already mentioned. 
I will now relate a tale which I heard concern¬ 
ing him both at Proconnesus and at Cyzicus. 
Aristeas, they said, who belonged to one of the 
noblest families in the island, had entered one 
day into a fuller’s shop, when he suddenly 
dropt down dead. Hereupon the fuller shut up 
his shop, and went to tell Aristeas’ kindred 
what had happened. The report of the death 
had just spread through the town, when a cer¬ 
tain Cyzicenian, lately arrived from Artaca, 
contradicted the rumour, affirming that he had 
met Aristeas on his road to Cyzicus, and had 
spoken with him. This man, therefore, strenu¬ 
ously denied the rumour; the relations, how¬ 
ever, proceeded to the fuller’s shop with all 
things necessary for the funeral, intending to 
carry the body away. But on the shop being 
opened, no Aristeas was found, either dead or 
alive. Seven years afterwards he reappeared, 
they told me, in Proconnesus, and wrote the 
poem called by the Greeks The Arimaspeia, 
after which he disappeared a second time. 
This is the tale current in the two cities above- 
mentioned. 

15. What follows I know to have happened 
to the Metapontines of Italy, three hundred 
and forty years^ after the second disappear- 

^ This date must certainly be wrong. The date 
usually assigned to Aristeas is about 580 b.c. 




11-22 THE HISTORY 127 


ance of Aristeas, as I collect by comparing the 
accounts given me at Proconnesus and Meta- 
pontum. Aristeas then, as the Metapontines 
affirm, appeared to them in their own country, 
and ordered them to set up an altar in honour 
of Apollo, and to place near it a statue to be 
called that of Aristeas the Proconnesian. “Apol- 
lo,’’ he told them, “had come to their coun¬ 
try once, though he had visited no other Itali- 
ots; and he had been with Apollo at the time, 
not however in his present form, but in the 
shape of a crow.” Having said so much, he 
vanished. Then the Metapontines, as they re¬ 
late, sent to Delphi, and inquired of the god 
in what light they were to regard the appear¬ 
ance of this ghost of a man. The Pythoness, in 
reply, bade them attend to what the speetre 
said, “for so it would go best with them.” Thus 
advised, they did as they had been directed: 
and there is now a statue bearing the name of 
Aristeas, close by the image of Apollo in the 
market-place of Metapontum, with bay-trees 
standing around it. But enough has been said 
concerning Aristeas. 

16. With regard to the regions which lie 
above the country whereof this portion of my 
history treats, there is no one who possesses any 
exact knowledge. Not a single person can I 
find who professes to be acquainted with them 
by actual observation. Even Aristeas, the trav¬ 
eller of whom I lately spoke, does not claim— 
and he is writing poetry—to have reached any 
farther than the Issedonians. What he relates 
concerning the regions beyond is, he confesses, 
mere hearsay, being the account which the Is¬ 
sedonians gave him of those countries. How¬ 
ever, I shall proceed to mention all that I have 
learnt of these parts by the most exact inquiries 
which I have been able to make concerning 
them. 

17. Above the mart of the Borysthenites, 
which is situated in the very centre of the 
whole sea-coast of Scythia, the first people who 
inhabit the land are the Callipedae, a Graeco- 
Scythic race. Next to them, as you go inland, 
dwell the people called the Alazonians. These 
two nations in other respects resemble the 
Scythians in their usages, but sow and eat corn, 
also onions, garlic, lentils, and millet. Beyond 
the Alazonians reside Scythian cultivators, 
who grow corn, not for their own use, but for 
sale. Still higher up are the Neuri. Northwards 
of the Neuri the continent, as far as it is known 
to us, is uninhabited. These are the nations 
along the course of the river Hypanis, west of 
the Borysthenes. 


18. Across the Borysthenes, the first country 
after you leave the coast is Hylaea (the Wood¬ 
land). Above this dwell the Scythian Husband¬ 
men, whom the Greeks living near the Hy¬ 
panis call Borysthenites, while they call them¬ 
selves Olbiopolites. These Husbandmen extend 
eastward a distance of three days’ journey to a 
river bearing the name of Panticap^s, while 
northward the country is theirs for eleven days’ 
sail up the course of the Borysthenes. Further 
inland there is a vast tract which is uninhabit¬ 
ed. Above this desolate region dwell the Can¬ 
nibals, who are a people apart, much unlike the 
Scythians. Above them the country becomes an 
utter desert; not a single tribe, so far as we 
know, inhabits it. 

19. Crossing the Panticapes, and proceeding 
eastward of the Husbandmen, we come upon 
the wandering Scythians, who neither plough 
nor sow. Their country, and the whole of this 
region, except Hylaea, is quite bare of trees. 
They extend towards the east a distance of 
fourteen^ days’ journey, occupying a tract 
which reaches to the river Gerrhus. 

20. On the opposite side of the Gerrhus is 
the Royal district, as it is called: here dwells the 
largest and bravest of the Scythian tribes, 
which looks upon all the other tribes in the 
light of slaves. Its country reaches on the south 
to Taurica, on the east to the trench dug by the 
sons of the blind slaves, the mart upon the 
Palus Maeotis, called Cremni (the Clifis), and 
in part to the river Tanais. North of the country 
of the Royal Scythians are the Melanchlaeni 
(Black-Robes), a people of quite a different 
race from the Scythians. Beyond them lie 
marshes and a region without inhabitants, so 
far as our knowledge reaches. 

21. When one crosses the Tanais, one is no 
longer in Scythia; the first region on crossing 
is that of the Sauromatae, who, beginning at 
the upper end of the Palus Marotis, stretch 
northward a distance of fifteen days’ journey, 
inhabiting a country which is entirely bare of 
trees, whether wild or cultivated. Above them, 
possessing the second region, dwell the Budini, 
whose territory is thickly wooded with trees of 
every kind. 

22. Beyond the Budini, as one goes north- 
ward,'first there is a desert, seven days’ journey 
across; after which, if one inclines somewhat 
to the east, the Thyssagetae are reached, a nu- 

^ Rennell proposes to read “four days’ journey” 
—and indeed without some such alteration the ge¬ 
ography of this part of Scythia is utterly inexplica¬ 
ble. 


128 HERODOTUS I Book iv 


merous nation quite distinct from any other, 
and living by the chase. Adjoining them, and 
within the limits of the same region, are the 
people who bear the name of lyrcae; they also 
support themselves by hunting, which they 
practise in the following manner. The hunter 
climbs a tree, the whole country abounding in 
wood, and there sets himself in ambush; he 
has a dog at hand, and a horse, trained to lie 
down upon its belly, and thus make itself low; 
the hunter keeps watch, and when he sees his 
game, lets fly an arrow; then mounting his 
horse, he gives the beast chase, his dog follow¬ 
ing hard all the while. Beyond these people, a 
little to the east, dwells a distinct tribe of 
Scyths, who revolted once from the Royal 
Scythians, and migrated into these parts. 

23. As far as their country, the tract of land 
whereof I have been speaking is all a smooth 
plain, and the soil deep; beyond you enter on 
a region which is rugged and stony. Passing 
over a great extent of this rough country, you 
come to a people dwelling at the foot of lofty 
mountains, who are said to be all—both men 
and women—bald from their birth, to have 
flat noses, and very long chins. These people 
speak a language of their own, but the dress 
which they wear is the same as the Scythian. 
They live on the fruit of a certain tree, the 
name of which is Ponticum; in size it is about 
equal to our fig-tree, and it bears a fruit like a 
bean, with a stone inside. When the fruit is 
ripe, they strain it through cloths; the juice 
which runs ofi is black and thick, and is called 
by the natives “aschy.” They lap this up with 
their tongues, and also mix it with milk for a 
drink; while they make the lees, which are sol¬ 
id, into cakes, and eat them instead of meat; 
for they have but few sheep in their country, 
in which there is no good pasturage. Each of 
them dwells under a tree, and they cover the 
tree in winter with a cloth of thick white felt, 
but take ofl the covering in the summer-time. 
No one harms these people, for they are looked 
upon as sacred—they do not even possess any 
warlike weapons. When their neighbours fall 
out, they make up the quarrel; and when one 
flies to them for refuge, he is safe from all hurt. 
They are called the Argippaeans. 

24. Up to this point the territory of which 
we are speaking is very completely explored, 
and all the nations between the coast and the 
bald-headed men are well known to us. For 
some of the Scythians are accustomed to pene¬ 
trate as far, of whom inquiry may easily be 
made, and Greeks also go there from the mart 


on the Borysthenes, and from the other marts 
along the Euxine. The Scythians who make 
this journey communicate with the inhabitants 
by means of seven interpreters and seven lan¬ 
guages. 

25. Thus far, therefore, the land is known; 
but beyond the bald-headed men lies a region 
of which no one can give any exact account. 
Lofty and precipitous mountains, which are 
never crossed, bar further progress. The bald 
men say, but it does not seem to me credible, 
that the people who live in these mountains 
have feet like goats; and that after passing them 
you find another race of men, who sleep dur¬ 
ing one half of the year. This latter statement 
appears to me quite unworthy of credit. The 
region east of the bald-headed men is well 
known to be inhabited by the Issedonians, but 
the tract that lies to the north of these two na¬ 
tions is entirely unknown, except by the ac¬ 
counts which they give of it. 

26. The Issedonians are said to have the fol¬ 
lowing customs. When a man’s lather dies, all 
the near relatives bring sheep to the house; 
which are sacrificed, and their flesh cut in 
pieces, while at the same time the dead body 
undergoes the like treatment. The two sorts of 
flesh are afterwards mixed together, and the 
whole is served up at a banquet. The head of 
the dead man is treated differently: it is 
stripped bare, cleansed, and set in gold. It then 
becomes an ornament on which they pride 
themselves, and is brought out year by year at 
the great festival which sons keep in honour 
of their fathers’ death, just as the Greeks keep 
their Genesia. In other respects the Issedonians 
are reputed to be observers of justice: and it is 
to be remarked that their women have equal 
authority with the men. Thus our knowledge 
extends as far as this nation. 

27. The regions beyond are known only 
from the accounts of the Issedonians, by whom 
the stories are told of the one-eyed race of men 
and the gold-guarding griffins. These stories 
are received by the Scythians from the Issedo¬ 
nians, and by them passed on to us Greeks: 
whence it arises that we give the one-eyed race 
the Scythian name of Arimaspi, *‘arima” being 
the Scythic word for “one,” and ”spii” for “the 
eye. 

28. The whole district whereof we have here 
discoursed has winters of exceeding rigour. 
During eight months the frost is so intense 
that water poured upon the ground does not 
form mud, but if a fire be lighted on it mud is 
produced. The sea freezes, and the Cimmer 



23 - 33 ] the history 129 


ian Bosphorus is frozen over. At that season 
the Scythians who dwell inside the trench 
make warlike expeditions upon the ice, and 
even drive their waggons across to the country 
of the Sindians. Such is the intensity of the 
cold during eight months out of the twelve; 
and even in the remaining four the climate is 
still cool. The character of the winter likewise 
is unlike that of the same season in any other 
country; for at that time, when the rains ought 
to fall in Scythia, there is scarcely any rain 
worth mentioning, while in summer it never 
gives over raining; and thunder, which else¬ 
where is frequent then, in Scythia is unknown 
in that part of the year, coming only in sum¬ 
mer, when it is very heavy. Thunder in the 
winter-time is there accounted a prodigy; as 
also are earthquakes, whether they happen in 
winter or summer. Horses bear the winter 
well, cold as it is, but mules and asses are quite 
unable to bear it; whereas in other countries 
mules and asses are found to endure the cold, 
while horses, if they stand still, are frost-bitten. 

29. To me it seems that the cold may like¬ 
wise be the cause which prevents the oxen in 
Scythia from having horns. There is a line of 
Homer’s in the Odyssey which gives a support 

; to my opinion:— 

^ Libya too, where horns bud quicks on the fore¬ 
heads of lambkins} 

' He means to say what is quite true, that in 
I warm countries the horns come early. So too 
i in countries where the cold is severe animals 
either have no horns, or grow them with diffi¬ 
culty—the cold being the cause in this in¬ 
stance. 

30. Here I must express my wonder—addi¬ 
tions being what my work always from the 
very first affected—that in Elis, where the cold 
is not remarkable, and there is nothing else to 
account for it, mules are never produced. The 
Eleans say it is in consequence of a curse; and 
their habit is, when the breeding-time comes, 
to take their mares into one of the adjoining 
countries, and there keep them till they are in 
foal, when they bring them back again into Elis. 

31. With respect to the feathers which are 
said by the Scythians to fill the air, and to pre¬ 
vent persons from penetrating into the remoter 
parts of the continent, or even having any view 
of those regions, my opinion is that in the 
countries above Scythia it always snows—less, 
of course, in the summer than in the winter¬ 
time. Now snow when it falls looks like feath- 

^ Odyssey, Bk. iv. 85. 


ers, as every one is aware who has seen it come 
down close to him. These northern regions, 
therefore, are uninhabitable by reason of the 
severity of the winter; and the Scythians, with 
their neighbours, call the snow-flakes feathers 
because, I think, of the likeness which they 
bear to them. I have now related what is said 
of the most distant parts of this continent 
whereof any account is given. 

32. Of the Hyperboreans nothing is said 
either by the Scythians or by any of the other 
dwellers in these regions, unless it be the Is- 
sedonians. But in my opinion, even the Issedo- 
nians are silent concerning them; otherwise 
the Scythians would have repeated their state¬ 
ments, as they do those concerning the one- 
eyed men. Hesiod, however, mentions them, 
and Homer also in the Epigoni, if that be real¬ 
ly a work of his. 

33. But the persons who have by far the 
most to say on this subject are the Delians. 
They declare that certain offerings, packed in 
wheaten straw, were brought from the country 
of the Hyperboreans into Scythia, and that the 
Scythians received them and passed them on 
to their neighbours upon the west, who con¬ 
tinued to pass them on until at last they reached 
the Adriatic. From hence they were sent south¬ 
ward, and when they came to Greece, were re¬ 
ceived first of all by the Dodonaeans. Thence 
they descended to the Maliac Gulf, from which 
they were carried across into Euboea, where the 
people handed them on from city to city, till 
they came at length to Carystus. The Carys- 
tians took them over to Tenos, without stop¬ 
ping at Andros; and the Tenians brought them 
finally to Delos. Such, according to their own 
account, was the road by which the offerings 
reached the Delians. Two damsels, they say, 
named Hyperoche and Laodice, brought the 
first offerings from the Hyperboreans; and 
with them the Hyperboreans sent five men to 
keep them from all harm by the way; these are 
the persons whom the Delians call “Perpher- 
ees,” and to whom great honours are paid at 
Delos. Afterwards the Hyperboreans, when 
they found that their messengers did not re¬ 
turn, thinking it would be a grievous thing al¬ 
ways to be liable to lose the envoys they should 
send,' adopted the following plan:—they 
wrapped their offerings in the wheaten straw, 
and hearing them to their borders, charged 
their neighbours to send them forward from 
one nation to another, which was done accord¬ 
ingly, and in this way the offerings reached 
Delos. I myself know of a practice like this, 



130 HERODOTUS [Book iv 


which obtains with the women of Thrace and 
Paconia. They in their sacrifices to the queenly 
Diana bring wheaten straw always with their 
offerings. Of my own knowledge I can testify 
that this is so. 

34. The damsels sent by the Hyperboreans 
died in Delos; and in their honour all the Deli¬ 
an girls and youths are wont to cut off their 
hair. The girls, before their marriage-day, cut 
off a curl, and twining it round a distaff, lay 
it upon the grave of the strangers. This grave 
is on the left as one enters the precinct of Di¬ 
ana, and has an olive-tree growing on it. The 
youths wind some of their hair round a kind of 
grass, and, like the girls, place it upon the 
tomb. Such are the honours paid to these dam¬ 
sels by the Delians. 

35. They add that, once before, there came 
to Delos by the same road as Hyperoche and 
Laodice, two other virgins from the Hyper¬ 
boreans, whose names were Arge and Opis. 
Hyperoche and Laodice came to bring to Ili- 
thyia the offering which they had laid upon 
themselves, in acknowledgment of their 
quick labours; but Arge and Opis came at the 
same time as the gods of Delos,^ and are hon¬ 
oured by the Delians in a different way. For 
the Delian women make collections in these 
maidens’ names, and invoke them in the hymn 
which Olen, a Lycian, composed for them; and 
the rest of the islanders, and even the lonians, 
have been taught by the Delians to do the like. 
This Olen, who came from Lycia, made the 
other old hymns also which are sung in Delos. 
The Delians add that the ashes from the 
thigh-bones burnt upon the altar are scattered 
over the tomb of Opis and Arge. Their tomb 
lies behind the temple of Diana, facing the 
east, near the banqueting-hall of the Ceians. 
Thus much then, and no more, concerning the 
Hyperboreans. 

36. As for the tale of Abaris, who is said to 
have been a Hyperborean, and to have gone 
with his arrow all round the world without 
once eating, I shall pass it by in silence. Thus 
much, however, is clear: if there are Hyperbor¬ 
eans, there must also be Hypernotians. For my 
part, I cannot but laugh when I see numbers 
of persons drawing maps of the world without 
having any reason to guide them; making, as 
they do, the ocean-stream to run all round the 
earth, and the earth itself to be an exact circle, 
as if described by a pair of compasses, with 
Europe and Asia just of the same size. The 
truth in this matter I will now proceed to ex- 

^ Apollo and Diana. 


plain in a very few words, making it clear what 
the real size of each region is, and what shape 
should be given them. 

37. The Persians inhabit a country upon the 
southern or Erythraean sea; above them, to the 
north, are the Medes; beyond the Medes, the 
Saspirians; beyond them, the Colchians, reach¬ 
ing to the northern sea, into which the Phasis 
empties itself. These four nations fill the whole 
space from one sea to the other. 

38. West of these nations there project into 
the sea two tracts which I will now describe; 
one, beginning at the river Phasis on the north, 
stretches along the Euxine and the Hellespont 
to Sigeum in the Troas; while on the south it 
reaches from the Myriandrian gulf, which ad¬ 
joins Phoenicia, to the Triopic promontory. 
This is one of the tracts, and is inhabited by 
thirty different nations. 

39. The other starts from the country of the 
Persians, and stretches into the Erythraean sea, 
containing first Persia, then Assyria, and after 
Assyria, Arabia. It ends, that is to say, it is con¬ 
sidered to end, though it does not really come 
to a termination, at the Arabian gulf—the gulf 
whereinto Darius conducted the canal which 
he made from the Nile. Between Persia and 
Phoenicia lies a broad and ample tract of coun¬ 
try, after which the region I am describing 
skirts our sea, stretching from Phoenicia along 
the coast of Palestine-Syria till it comes to 
Egypt, where it terminates. This entire tract 
contains but three nations. The whole of Asia 
west of the country of the Persians is com¬ 
prised in these two regions. 

40. Beyond the tract occupied by the Per¬ 
sians, Medes, Saspirians, and Colchians, to¬ 
wards the east and the region of the sunrise, 
Asia is bounded on the south by the Erythrae¬ 
an sea, and on the north by the Caspian and 
the river Araxes, which flows towards the ris¬ 
ing sun. Till you reach India the country is 
peopled; but further east it is void of inhabi¬ 
tants, and no one can say what sort of region 
it is. Such then is the shape, and such the size 
of Asia. 

41. Libya belongs to one of the above-men¬ 
tioned tracts, for it adjoins on Egypt. In Egypt 
the tract is at first a narrow neck, the distance 
from our sea to the Erythraean not exceeding a 
hundred thousand fathoms, or, in other words, 
a thousand furlongs; but from the point 
where the neck ends, the tract which bears the 
name of Libya is of very great breadth. 

42. For my part I am astonished that men 
should ever have divided Libya, Asia, and Eu- 





34 -45] THE HISTORY 131 


rope as they have, for they are exceedingly un¬ 
equal. Europe extends the entire length of the 
other two, and for breadth will not even (as I 
think) bear to be compared to them. As for 
Libya, we know it to be washed on all sides by 
the sea, except where it is attached to Asia. 
This discovery was first made by Necos, the 
Egyptian king, who on desisting from the 
canal which he had begun between the Nile 
and the Arabian gulf, sent to sea a number of 
ships manned by Phcenicians, with orders to 
make for the Pillars of Hercules, and return to 
Egypt through them, and by the Mediterran¬ 
ean. The Phoenicians took their departure 
from Egypt by way of the Erythraean sea, and 
so sailed into the southern ocean. When au¬ 
tumn came, they went ashore, wherever they 
might happen to be, and having sown a tract 
of land with corn, waited until the grain was 
fit to cut. Having reaped it, they again set sail; 
and thus it came to pass that two whole years 
went by, and it was not till the third year that 
they doubled the Pillars of Hercules, and made 
good their voyage home. On their return, they 
declared—I for my part do not believe them, 
but perhaps others may—that in sailing round 
Libya they had the sun upon their right hand. In 
this way was the extent of Libya first discovered. 

43. Next to these Phcenicians the Carthagin¬ 
ians, according to their own accounts, made 
the voyage. For Sataspes, son of Teaspes the 
Achxmenian, did not circumnavigate Libya, 
though he was sent to do so; but, fearing the 
length and desolateness of the journey, he 
turned back and left unaccomplished the task 
which had been set him by his mother. This 
man had used violence towards a maiden, the 
daughter of Zopyrus, son of Megabyzus, and 
King Xerxes was about to impale him for the 
ofience, when his mother, who was a sister of 
Darius, begged him off, undertaking to punish 
his crime more heavily than the king himself 
had designed. She would force him, she said, to 
sail round Libya and return to Egypt by the 
Arabian gulf. Xerxes gave his consent; and 
Sataspes went down to Egypt, and there got a 
ship and crew, with which he set sail for the 
Pillars of Hercules. Having passed the Straits, 
he doubled the Libyan headland, known as 
Cape Soloeis, and proceeded southward. Fol¬ 
lowing this course for many months over a vast 
stretch of sea, and finding that more water 
than he had crossed still lay ever before him, 
he put about, and came back to Egypt. Thence 
proceeding to the court, he made report to 
Xerxes, that at the farthest point to which he 


had reached, the coast was occupied by a 
dwarfish race, who wore a dress made from the 
palm tree. These people, whenever he landed, 
left their towns and fled away to the moun¬ 
tains; his men, however, did them no wrong, 
only entering into their cities and taking some 
of their cattle. The reason why he had not 
sailed quite round Libya was, he said, because 
the ship stopped, and would no go any further. 
Xerxes, however, did not accept this account 
for true; and so Sataspes, as he had failed to ac¬ 
complish the task set him, was impaled by the 
king’s orders in accordance with the former 
sentence. One of his eunuchs, on hearing of 
his death, ran away with a great portion of his 
wealth, and reached Samos, where a certain 
Samian seized the whole. I know the man’s 
name well, but I shall willingly forget it here. 

44. Of the greater part of Asia Darius was 
the discoverer. Wishing to know where the 
Indus (which is the only river save one that 
produces crocodiles) emptied itself into the sea, 
he sent a number of men, on whose truthful¬ 
ness he could rely, and among them Scylax of 
Caryanda, to sail down the river. They started 
from the city of Caspatyrus, in the region 
called Pactyi’ea, and sailed down the stream in 
an easterly direction to the sea. Here they 
turned westward, and, after a voyage of thirty 
months, reached the place from which the 
Egyptian king, of whom I spoke above, sent 
the Phoenicians to sail round Libya. After this 
voyage was completed, Darius conquered the 
Indians, and made use of the sea in those parts. 
Thus all Asia, except the eastern portion, has 
been found to be similarly circumstanced with 
Libya. 

45. But the boundaries of Europe are quite 
unknown, and there is not a man who can say 
whether any sea girds it round either on the 
north or on the east, while in length it un¬ 
doubtedly extends as far as both the other two. 
For my part I cannot conceive why three 
names, and women’s names especially, should 
ever have been given to a tract which is in re¬ 
ality one, nor why the Egyptian Nile and the 
Colchian Phasis (or according to others the 
Msotic Tanais and Cimmerian ferry) should 
have been fixed upon for the boundary lines; 
nor can I even say who gave the three tracts 
their names, or whence they took the epithets. 
According to the Greeks in general, Libya was 
so called after a certain Libya, a native woman, 
and Asia after the wife of Prometheus. The 
Lydians, however, put in a claim to the latter 
name, which, they declare, was not derived 


132 HERODOTUS [ Book iv 


from Asia the wife of Prometheus, but from 
Asies, the son of Cotys, and grandson of 
Manes, who also gave name to the tribe Asias 
at Sardis. As for Europe, no one can say 
whether it is surrounded by the sea or not, 
neither is it known whence the name of Eu¬ 
rope was derived, nor who gave it name, un¬ 
less we say that Europe was so called after the 
Tyrian Europe, and before her time was name¬ 
less, like the other divisions. But it is certain 
that Europe was an Asiatic, and never even set 
foot on the land which the Greeks now call 
Europe, only sailing from Phoenicia to Crete, 
and from Crete to Lycia. However let us quit 
these matters. We shall ourselves continue to 
use the names which custom sanctions. 

46. The Euxine sea, where Darius now went 
to war, has nations dwelling around it, with 
the one exception of the Scythians, more un¬ 
polished than those of any other region that we 
know of. For, setting aside Anacharsis and the 
Scythian people, there is not within this region 
a single nation which can be put forward as 
having any claims to wisdom, or which has 
produced a single person of any high repute. 
The Scythians indeed have in one respect, and 
that the very most important of all those that 
fall under man’s control, shown themselves 
wiser than any nation upon the face of the 
earth. Their customs otherwise are not such as 
I admire. The one thing of which I speak is 
the contrivance whereby they make it impos¬ 
sible for the enemy who invades them to es¬ 
cape destruction, while they themselves are en¬ 
tirely out of his reach, unless it please them to 
engage with him. Having neither cities nor 
forts, and carrying their dwellings with them 
wherever they go; accustomed, moreover, one 
and all of them, to shoot from horseback; and 
living not by husbandry but on their cattle, 
their waggons the only houses that they pos¬ 
sess, how can they fail of being unconquerable, 
and unassailable even.? 

47. The nature of their country, and the riv¬ 
ers by which it is intersected, greatly favour 
this mode of resisting attacks. For the land is 
level, well watered, and abounding in pasture; 
while the rivers which traverse it are almost 
equal in number to the canals of Egypt. Of 
these I shall only mention the most famous and 
such as are navigable to some distance from the 
sea. They are, the Ister, which has five mouths; 
the Tyras, the Hypanis, the Borysthenes, the 
Panticapes, the Hypacyris, the Gerrhus, and 
the Tanais. The courses of these streams I shall 
now proceed to describe. 


48. The Ister is of all the rivers with which 
we are acquainted the mightiest. It never var¬ 
ies in height, but continues at the same level 
summer and winter. Counting from the west { 
it is the first of the Scythian rivers, and the r 
reason of its being the greatest is that it re¬ 
ceives the water of several tributaries. Now the 
tributaries which swell its flood are the follow¬ 
ing: first, on the side of Scythia, these five— 
the stream called by the Scythians Porata, and , 
by the Greeks Pyretus, the Tiarantus, the |j 
Ararus, the Naparis, and the Ordessus. The • 
first mentioned is a great stream, and is the ,r 
easternmost of the tributaries. The Tiarantus 

is of less volume, and more to the west. The 
Ararus, Naparis, and Ordessus fall into the j 
Ister between these two. All the above men- ■: 
tioned are genuine Scythian rivers, and go to i 
swell the current of the Ister. 

49. From the country of the Agathyrsi comes 1 
down another river, the Maris, which empties j 
itself into the same; and from the heights of \ 
Haemus descend with a northern course three 
mighty streams, the Atlas, the Auras, and the ' 
Tibisis, and pour their waters into it. Thrace 'I 
gives it three tributaries, the Athrys, the Noes, hi 
and the Artanes, which all pass through the || 
country of the Crobyzian Thracians. Another ’ 
tributary is furnished by Pa'onia, namely, the 
Scius; this river, rising near Mount Rhodope, 
forces its way through the chain of Hamus,^ 
and so reaches the Ister. From Illyria comes 
another stream, the Angrus, which has a 
course from south to north, and after watering 
the Triballian plain, falls into the Brongus, 
which falls into the Ister. So the Ister is aug- ‘ 
mented by these two streams, both consider- • 
able. Besides all these, the Ister receives also 
the waters of the Carpis and the Alpis, two 
rivers running in a northerly direction from 
the country above the Umbrians. For the Ister 
flows through the whole extent of Europe, ris¬ 
ing in the country of the Celts (the most west¬ 
erly of all the nations of Europe, excepting the f 
Cynetians), and thence running across the 
continent till it reaches Scythia, whereof it 
washes the flanks. 

50. All these streams, then, and many others, 
add their waters to swell the flood of the Ister, 
which thus increased becomes the mightiest of 
rivers; for undoubtedly if we compare the 
stream of the Nile with the single stream of the 
Ister, we must give the preference to the Nile, 
of which no tributary river, nor even rivulet, 

^ This is untrue. No stream forces its way 
through this chain. 







46 - 57 ] the history 133 


augments the volume. The Ister remains at 
the same level both summer and winter— 
owing to the following reasons, as I believe. 
During the winter it runs at its natural height, 
or a very little higher, because in those coun¬ 
tries there is scarcely any rain in winter, but 
constant snow. When summer comes, this 
snow, which is of great depth, begins to melt, 
and flows into the Ister, which is swelled at 
that season, not only by this cause but also by 
the rains, which are heavy and frequent at that 
part of the year. Thus the various streams 
which go to form the Ister are higher in sum¬ 
mer than in winter, and just so much higher 
as the sun’s power and attraction are greater; 
so that these two causes counteract each other, 
and the effect is to produce a balance, whereby 
the Ister remains always at the same level. 

51. This, then, is one of the great Scythian 
rivers; the next to it is the Tyras, which rises 
from a great lake separating Scythia from the 
land of the Neuri, and runs with a southerly 
course to the sea. Greeks dwell at the mouth 
of the river, who are called Tyritae. 

52. The third river is the Hypanis. This 

stream rises within the limits of Scythia, and 
has its source in another vast lake, around 
which wild white horses graze. The lake is 
called, properly enough, the Mother of the 
Hypanis. The Hypanis, rising here, during the 
distance of five days’ navigation is a shallow 
stream, and the water sweet and pure; thence, 
however, to the sea, which is a distance of four 
days, it is exceedingly bitter. This change is 
caused by its receiving into it at that point a 
brook the waters of which are so bitter that, al¬ 
though it is but a tiny rivulet, it nevertheless 
taints the entire Hypanis, which is a large 
stream among those of the second order. The 
source of this bitter spring is on the borders of 
the Scythian Husbandmen, where they adjoin 
upon the Alazonians; and the place where it 
rises is called in the Scythic tongue Exampceus, 
which means in our language, “The Sacred 
Ways.” The spring itself bears the same name. 
The Tyras and the Hypanis approach each 
other in the country of the Alazonians, but 
afterwards separate, and leave a wide space be¬ 
tween their streams. ^ 

53. The fourth of the Scythian rivers is the 
Borysthenes. Next to the Ister, it is the greatest 
of them all; and, in my judgment, it is the most 
productive river, not merely in Scythia, but in 
the whole world, excepting only the Nile, with 
which no stream can possibly compare. It has 
upon its banks the loveliest and most excellent 


pasturages for cattle; it contains abundance of 
the most delicious fish; its water is most pleas¬ 
ant to the taste; its stream is limpid, while all 
the other rivers near it are muddy; the richest 
harvests spring up along its course, and where 
the ground is not sown, the heaviest crops of 
grass; while salt forms in great plenty about its 
mouth without human aid, and large fish are 
taken in it of the sort called Antacaei, without 
any prickly bones, and good for pickling. Nor 
are these the whole of its marvels. As far in¬ 
land as the place named Gerrhus, which is dis¬ 
tant forty days’ voyage from the sea, its course 
is known, and its direction is from north to 
south; but above this no one has traced it, so as 
to say through what countries it flows. It enters 
the territory of the Scythian Husbandmen after 
running for some time across a desert region, 
and continues for ten days’ navigation to pass 
through the land which they inhabit. It is the 
only river besides the Nile the sources of which 
are unknown to me, as they are also (I believe) 
to all the other Greeks. Not long before it 
reaches the sea, the Borysthenes is joined by the 
Hypanis, which pours its waters into the same 
lake. The land that lies between them, a nar¬ 
row point like the beak of a ship, is called Cape 
Hippolaiis. Here is a temple dedicated to 
Ceres, and opposite the temple upon the Hy¬ 
panis is the dwelling-place of the Borysthenites. 
But enough has been said of these streams. 

54. Next in succession comes the fifth river, 
called the Panticapes, which has, like the Borys 
thenes, a course from north to south, and rises 
from a lake. The space between this river and 
the Borysthenes is occupied by the Scythians 
who are engaged in husbandry. After watering 
their country, the Panticapes flows through 
Hyla:a, and empties itself into the Borysthenes. 

55. The sixth stream is the Hypacyris, a 
river rising from a lake, and running directly 
through the middle of the Nomadic Scythians. 
It falls into the sea near the city of Carcinitis, 
leaving Hylaea and the course of Achilles to the 
right. 

56. The seventh river is the Gerrhus, which 
is a branch thrown out by the Borysthenes at 
the point where the course of that stream first 
begins to be known, to wit, the region called 
by the same name as the stream itself, viz. 
Gerrhus. This river on its passage towards 
the sea divides the country of the Nomadic 
from that of the Royal Scyths. It runs into the 
Hypacyris. 

57. The eighth river is the Tanais, a stream 
which has its source, far up the country, in a 


134 HERODOTUS [ Book iv 


lake of vast size, and which empties itself into 
another still larger lake, the Palus Maeotis, 
whereby the country of the Royal Scythians is 
divided from that of the Sauromatae. The 
Tanais receives the waters of a tributary 
stream, called the Hyrgis. 

58. Such then are the rivers of chief note in 
Scythia. The grass which the land produces is 
more apt to generate gall in the beasts that feed 
on it than any other grass which is known to 
us, as plainly appears on the opening of their 
carcases. 

59. Thus abundantly are the Scythians pro¬ 
vided with the most important necessaries. 
Their manners and customs come now to be 
described. They worship only the following 
gods, namely, Vesta, whom they reverence be¬ 
yond all the rest, Jupiter, and Tellus, whom 
they consider to be the wife of Jupiter; and 
after these Apollo, Celestial Venus, Hercules, 
and Mars. These gods are worshipped by the 
whole nation: the Royal Scythians ol 4 er sacri¬ 
fice likewise to Neptune. In the Scythic tongue 
Vesta is called Tahiti, Jupiter (very properly, 
in my judgment) Papaus, Tellus Apia, Apollo 
(Etosyrus, Celestial Venus Artimpasa, and 
Neptune Thamimasadas. They use no images, 
altars, or temples, except in the worship of 
Mars; but in his worship they do use them. 

60. The manner of their sacrifices is every¬ 
where and in every case the same; the victim 
stands with its two fore-feet bound together by 
a cord, and the person who is about to olTer, 
taking his station behind the victim, gives the 
rope a pull, and thereby throws the animal 
down; as it falls he invokes the god to whom 
he is offering; after which he puts a noose 
round the animal’s neck, and, inserting a small 
stick, twists it round, and so strangles him. No 
fire is lighted, there is no consecration, and no 
pouring out of drink-offerings; but directly 
that the beast is strangled the sacrificer flays 
him, and then sets to work to boil the flesh. 

61. As Scythia, however, is utterly barren of 
firewood, a plan has had to be contrived for 
boiling the flesh, which is the following. After 
flaying the beasts, they take out all the bones, 
and (if they possess such gear) put the flesh 
into boilers made in the country, which are 
very like the cauldrons of the Lesbians, ex¬ 
cept that they are of a much larger size; then 
placing the bones of the animals beneath the 
cauldron, they set them alight, and so boil the 
meat. If they do not happen to possess a cauld¬ 
ron, they make the animal’s paunch hold the 
flesh, and pouring in at the same time a little 


water, lay the bones under and light them. 
The bones burn beautifully; and the paunch 
easily contains all the flesh when it is stript ; 
from the bones, so that by this plan your ox is 
made to boil himself, and other victims also 1 
to do the like. When the meat is all cooked, the ji 
sacrificer offers a portion of the flesh and of 11 
the entrails, by casting it on the ground before I 
him. They sacrifice all sorts of cattle, but most | 
commonly horses. 

62. Such are the victims offered to the other 
gods, and such is the mode in which they are 
sacrificed; but the rites paid to Mars are dif- 1 
ferent. In every district, at the seat of govern¬ 
ment, there stands a temple of this god, where- |, 
of the following is a description. It is a pile of 
brushwood, made of a vast quantity of fagots, 

in length and breadth three furlongs; in height , 
somewhat less, having a square platform upon I 
the top, three sides of which are precipitous, 
while the fourth slopes so that men may walk 
up it. Each year a hundred and fifty waggon¬ 
loads of brushwood are added to the pile, 
which sinks continually by reason of the rains. 

An antique iron sword is planted on the top of 
every such mound, and serves as the image of 
Mars: yearly sacrifices of cattle and of horses 
are made to it, and more victims are offered 
thus than to all the rest of their gods. When j 
prisoners are taken in war, out of every hun¬ 
dred men they sacrifice one, not however with 
the same rites as the cattle, but with different. 
Libations of wine are first poured upon their 
heads, after which they are slaughtered over 
a vessel; the vessel is then carried up to the top 
of the pile, and the blood poured upon the 
scymitar. While this takes place at the top of 
the mound, below, by the side of the temple, 
the right hands and arms of the slaughtered 
prisoners are cut off, and tossed on high into 
the air. Then the other victims are slain, and 
those who have offered the sacrifice depart, 
leaving the hands and arms where they may 
chance to have fallen, and the bodies also, 
separate. 

63. Such are the observances of the Scythians 
with respect to sacrifice. They never use swine 
for the purpose, nor indeed is it their wont to 
breed them in any part of their country. 

64. In what concerns war, their customs are 
the following. The Scythian soldier drinks the 
blood of the first man he overthrows in battle. 
Whatever number he slays, he cuts off all their 
heads, and carries them to the king; since he 
is thus entitled to a share of the booty, whereto 
he forfeits all claim if he does not produce a 






58 - 69 ] THE HISTORY 135 


head. In order to strip the skull of its covering, 
he makes a cut round the head above the ears, 
and, laying hold of the scalp, shakes the skull 
out; then with the rib of an ox he scrapes the 
scalp clean of flesh, and softening it by rubbing 
between the hands, uses it thenceforth as a 
napkin. The Scyth is proud of these scalps, and 
hangs them from his bridle-rein; the greater 
the number of such napkins that a man can 
show, the more highly is he esteemed among 
them. Many make themselves cloaks, like the 
capotes of our peasants, by sewing a quantity 
of these scalps together. Others flay the right 
arms of their dead enemies, and make of the 
skin, which is stripped off with the nails hang¬ 
ing to it, a covering for their quivers. Now the 
skin of a man is thick and glossy, and would 
in whiteness surpass almost all other hides. 
Some even flay the entire body of their enemy, 
and stretching it upon a frame carry it about 
with them wherever they ride. Such are the 
Scythian customs with respect to scalps and 
skins. 

65. The skulls of their enemies, not indeed 
of all, but of those whom they most detest, they 
treat as follows. Having sawn of! the portion 
below the eyebrows, and cleaned out tbe inside, 
they cover the outside with leather. When a 
man is poor, this is all that he does; but if he is 
rich, he also lines the inside with gold: in 
either case the skull is used as a drinking-cup. 
They do the same with the skulls of their own 
kith and kin if they have been at feud with 
them, and have vanquished them in the pres¬ 
ence of the king. When strangers whom they 
deem of any account come to visit them, these 
skulls are handed round, and the host tells how 
that these were his relations who made war 
upon him, and how that he got the better of 
them; all this being looked upon as proof of 
bravery. 

66. Once a year the governor of each district, 
at a set place in his own province, mingles a 
bowl of wine, of which all Scythians have a 
right to drink by whom foes have been slain; 
while they who have slain no enemy are not 
allowed to taste of the bowl, but sit aloof in 
disgrace. No greater shame than this can hap¬ 
pen to them. Such as have slain a very large 
number of foes, have two cups instead of one, 
and drink from both. 

67. Scythia has an abundance of soothsayers, 
who foretell the future by means of a number 
of willow wands. A large bundle of these 
wands is brought and laid on the ground. The 
soothsayer unties the bundle, and places each 


wand by itself, at the same time uttering his 
prophecy: then, while he is still speaking, he 
gathers the rods together again, and makes 
them up once more into a bundle. This mode 
of divination is of home growth in Scythia. 
The Enarees, or woman-like men, have another 
method, which they say Venus taught them. 
It is done with the inner bark of the linden- 
tree. They take a piece of this bark, and, split¬ 
ting it into three strips, keep twining the strips 
about their fingers, and untwining them, while 
they prophesy. 

68. Whenever the Scythian king falls sick, 
he sends for the three soothsayers of most re¬ 
nown at the time, who come and make trial of 
their art in the mode above described. Gen¬ 
erally they say that the king is ill because such 
or such a person, mentioning his name, has 
sworn falsely by the royal hearth. This is the 
usual oath among the Scythians, when they 
wish to swear with very great solemnity. Then 
the man accused of having foresworn himself 
is arrested and brought before the king. The 
soothsayers tell him that by their art it is clear 
he has sworn a false oath by the royal hearth, 
and so caused the illness of the king—he de¬ 
nies the charge, protests that he has sworn no 
false oath, and loudly complains of the wrong 
done to him. Upon this the king sends for six 
new soothsayers, who try the matter by sooth¬ 
saying. If they too find the man guilty of the 
offence, straightway he is beheaded by those 
who first accused him, and his goods are part¬ 
ed among them: if, on the contrary, they acquit 
him, other soothsayers, and again others, are 
sent for, to try the case. Should the greater 
number decide in favour of the man’s inno¬ 
cence, then they who first accused him forfeit 
their lives. 

69. The mode of their execution is the fol¬ 
lowing: a waggon is loaded with brushwood, 
and oxen are harnessed to it; the soothsayers, 
with their feet tied together, their hands bound 
behind their backs, and their mouths gagged, 
are thrust into the midst of the brushwood; 
finally the wood is set alight, and the oxen, 
being startled, are made to rush off with the 
waggon. It often happens that the oxen and 
the soothsayers are both consumed together, 
but sometimes the pole of the waggon is burnt 
through, and the oxen escape with a scorching. 
Diviners—lying diviners, they call them—are 
burnt in the way described, for other causes be¬ 
sides the one here spoken of. When the king 
puts one of them to death, he takes care not to 
let any of his sons survive: all the male off- 


136 HERODOTUS [Book iv 


spring are slain with the father, only the fe¬ 
males being allowed to live. 

70. Oaths among the Scyths are accompa¬ 
nied with the following ceremonies: a large 
earthern bowl is filled with wine, and the par¬ 
ties to the oath, wounding themselves slightly 
with a knife or an awl, drop some of their 
blood into the wine; then they plunge into the 
mixture a scymitar, some arrows, a battle-axe, 
and a javelin, all the while repeating prayers; 
lastly the two contracting parties drink each a 
draught from the bowl, as do also the chief 
men among their followers. 

71. The tombs of their kings are in the land 
of the Gerrhi, who dwell at the point where the 
Borysthenes is first navigable. Here, when the 
king dies, they dig a grave, which is square in 
shape, and of great size. When it is ready, they 
take the king’s corpse, and, having opened the 
belly, and cleaned out the inside, fill the cavity 
with a preparation of chopped cypress, frank¬ 
incense, parsley-seed, and anise-seed, after 
which they sew up the opening, enclose the 
body in wax, and, placing it on a waggon, 
carry it about through all the different tribes. 
On this procession each tribe, when it receives 
the corpse, imitates the example which is first 
set by the Royal Scythians; every man chops 
off a piece of his ear, crops his hair close, and 
makes a cut all round his arm, lacerates his 
forehead and his nose, and thrusts an arrow 
through his left hand. Then they who have 
the care of the corpse carry it with them to an¬ 
other of the tribes which are under the Scyth¬ 
ian rule, followed by those whom they first 
visited. On completing the circuit of all the 
tribes under their sway, they find themselves 
in the country of the Gerrhi, who are the most 
remote of all, and so they come to the tombs of 
the kings. There the body of the dead king is 
laid in the grave prepared for it, stretched upon 
a mattress; spears are fixed in the ground on 
either side of the corpse, and beams stretched 
across above it to form a roof, which is covered 
with a thatching of osier twigs. In the open 
space around the body of the king they bury 
one of his concubines, first killing her by 
strangling, and also his cup-bearer, his cook, 
his groom, his lacquey, his messenger, some of 
his horses, firstlings of all his other possessions, 
and some golden cups; for they use neither 
silver nor brass. After this they set to work, and 
raise a vast mound above the grave, all of them 
vying with each other and seeking to make it 
as tall as possible. 

72. When a year is gone by, further cere¬ 


monies take place. Fifty of the best of the late 
king’s attendants are taken, all native Scythians 
—for, as bought slaves are unknown in the 
country, the Scythian kings choose any of their 
subjects that they like, to wait on them—fifty 
of these are taken and strangled, with fifty of 
the most beautiful horses. When they are dead, 
their bowels are taken out, and the cavity 
cleaned, filled full of chaff, and straightway 
sewn up again. This done, a number of posts 
are driven into the ground, in sets of two pairs 
each, and on every pair half the felly of a wheel 
is placed archwise; then strong stakes are run 
lengthways through the bodies of the horses 
from tail to neck, and they are mounted up 
upon the fellies, so that the felly in front sup¬ 
ports the shoulders of the horse, while that be¬ 
hind sustains the belly and quarters, the legs 
dangling in mid-air; each horse is furnished 
with a bit and bridle, which latter is stretched 
out in front of the horse, and fastened to a peg. 
The fifty strangled youths are then mounted 
severally on the fifty horses. To effect this, a 
second stake is passed through their bodies 
along the course of the spine to the neck; the 
lower end of which projects from the body, 
and is fixed into a socket, made in the stake 
that runs lengthwise down the horse. The fifty 
riders are thus ranged in a circle round the 
tomb, and so left. 

73. Such, then, is the mode in which the 
kings are buried: as for the people, when any 
one dies, his nearest of kin lay him upon a 
waggon and take him round to all his friends 
in succession: each receives them in turn and 
entertains them with a banquet, whereat the 
dead man is served with a portion of all that is 
set before the others; this is done for forty 
days, at the end of which time the burial takes 
place. After the burial, those engaged in it have 
to purify themselves, which they do in the fol¬ 
lowing way. First they well soap and wash 
their heads; then, in order to cleanse their 
bodies, they act as follows: they make a booth 
by fixing in the ground three sticks inclined 
towards one another, and stretching around 
them woollen felts, which they arrange so as to 
fit as close as possible: inside the booth a dish 
is placed upon the ground, into which they 
put a number of red-hot stones, and then add 
sojiie hemp-seed. 

74. Hemp grows in Scythia: it is very like 
flax; only that it is a much coarser and taller 
plant: some grows wild about the country, 
some is produced by cultivation: the Thracians 
make garments of it which closely resemble 



70-78] THE HISTORY 137 


linen; so much so, indeed, that if a person has 
never seen hemp he is sure to think they are 
linen, and if he has, unless he is very experi¬ 
enced in such matters, he will not know of 
which material they are. 

75. The Scythians, as I said, take some of 
this hemp-seed, and, creeping under the felt 
coverings, throw it upon the red-hot stones; 
immediately it smokes, and gives out such a 
vapour as no Grecian vapour-bath can exceed; 
the Scyths, delighted, shout for joy, and this 
vapour serves them instead of a water-bath; 
for they never by any chance wash their bodies 
with water. Their women make a mixture of 
cypress, cedar, and frankincense wood, which 
they pound into a paste upon a rough piece of 
stone, adding a little water to it. With this 
substance, which is of a thick consistency, they 
plaster their faces all over, and indeed their 
whole bodies. A sweet odour is thereby im¬ 
parted to them, and when they take of! the 
plaster on the day following, their skin is clean 
and glossy. 

76. The Scythians have an extreme hatred 
of all foreign customs, particularly of those in 
use among the Greeks, as the instances of Ana- 
charsis, and, more lately, of Scylas, have fully 
shown. The former, after he had travelled over 
a great portion of the world, and displayed 
wherever he went many proofs of wisdom, as 
he sailed through the Hellespont on his return 
to Scythia touched at Cyzicus. There he found 
the inhabitants celebrating with much pomp 
and magnificence a festival to the Mother of 
the Gods,^ and was himself induced to make a 
vow to the goddess, whereby he engaged, if 
he got back safe and sound to his home, that 
he would give her a festival and a night-proces¬ 
sion in all respects like those which he had seen 
in Cyzicus. When, therefore, he arrived in 
Scythia, he betook himself to the district called 
the Woodland, which lies opposite the course 
of Achilles, and is covered with trees of all 
manner of different kinds, and there went 
through all the sacred rites with the tabour in 
his hand, and the images tied to him. While 
thus employed, he was noticed by one of the 
Scythians, who went and told king Saulius 
what he had seen. Then king Saulius came in 
person, and when he perceived what Anachar- 
sis was about, he shot at him with an arrow 
and killed him. To this day, if you ask the 
Scyths about Anacharsis, they pretend igno¬ 
rance of him, because of his Grecian travels 
and adoption of the customs of foreigners. I 

^ Cybele or Rhea. 


learnt, however, from Timnes, the steward of 
Ariapithes, that Anacharsis was paternal uncle 
to the Scythian king Idanthyrsus, being the 
son of Gnurus, who was the son of Lycus and 
the grandson of Spargapithes. If Anacharsis 
were really of this house, it must have been by 
his own brother that he was slain, for Idan¬ 
thyrsus was a son of the Saulius who put An¬ 
acharsis to death. 

77. I have heard, however, another tale, very 
different from this, which is told by the Pelo¬ 
ponnesians: they say, that Anacharsis was sent 
by the king of the Scyths to make acquaint¬ 
ance with Greece—that he went, and on his re¬ 
turn home reported that the Greeks were all 
occupied in the pursuit of every kind of knowl¬ 
edge, except the Lacedaemonians; who, how¬ 
ever, alone knew how to converse sensibly. A 
silly tale this, which the Greeks have invented 
for their amusement! There is no doubt that 
Anacharsis suffered death in the mode already 
related, on account of his attachment to for¬ 
eign customs, and the intercourse which he 
held with the Greeks. 

78. Scylas, likewise, the son of Ariapithes, 
many years later, met with almost the very 
same fate. Ariapithes, the Scythian king, had 
several sons, among them this Scylas, who was 
the child, not of a native Scyth, but of a woman 
of Istria. Bred up by her, Scylas gained an ac¬ 
quaintance with the Greek language and let¬ 
ters. Some time afterwards, Ariapithes was 
treacherously slain by Spargapithes, king of the 
Agathyrsi; whereupon Scylas succeeded to the 
throne, and married one of his father’s wives, 
a woman named Opoea. This Opoea was a 
Scythian by birth, and had brought Ariapithes 
a son called Oricus. Now when Scylas found 
himself king of Scythia, as he disliked the 
Scythic mode of life, and was attached, by his 
bringing up, to the manners of the Greeks, he 
made it his usual practice, whenever he came 
with his army to the town of the Borysthen- 
ites, who, according to their own account, are 
colonists of the Milesians—he made it his 
practice, I say, to leave the army before the city, 
and, having entered within the walls by him¬ 
self, and carefully closed the gates, to exchange 
his Scythian dress for Grecian garments, and 
in this attire to walk about the forum, without 
guards or retinue. The Borysthenites kept 
watch at the gates, that no Scythian might see 
the king thus apparelled. Scylas, meanwhile, 
lived exactly as the Greeks, and even offered 
sacrifices to the gods according to the Grecian 
rites. In this way he would pass a month, or 


138 HERODOTUS [Bookiv 


more, with the Borysthenites, after which he 
would clothe himself again in his Scythian 
dress, and so take his departure. This he did 
repeatedly, and even built himself a house in 
Borysthenes, and married a wife there who 
was a native of the place. 

79. But when the time came that was or¬ 
dained to bring him woe, the occasion of his 
ruin was the following. He wanted to be in¬ 
itiated in the Bacchic mysteries, and was on the 
point of obtaining admission to the rites, when 
a most strange prodigy occurred to him. The 
house which he possessed, as I mentioned a 
short time back, in the city of the Borysthen¬ 
ites, a building of great extent and erected at 
a vast cost, round which there stood a number 
of sphinxes and griffins carved in white marble, 
was struck by lightning from on high, and 
burnt to the ground. Scylas, nevertheless, went 
on and received the initiation. Now the Scyth¬ 
ians are wont to reproach the Greeks with their 
Bacchanal rage, and to say that it is not rea¬ 
sonable to imagine there is a god who impels 
men to madness. No sooner, therefore, was 
Scylas initiated in the Bacchic mysteries than 
one of the Borysthenites went and carried the 
news to the Scythians—“You Scyths laugh at 
us,” he said, “because we rave when the god 
seizes us. But now our god has seized upon 
your king, who raves like us, and is maddened 
by the influence. If you think I do not tell you 
true, come with me, and I will show him to 
you.” The chiefs of the Scythians went with 
the man accordingly, and the Borysthenite, 
conducting them into the city, placed them se¬ 
cretly on one of the towers. Presently Scylas 
passed by with the band of revellers, raving 
like the rest, and was seen by the watchers. Re¬ 
garding the matter as a very great misfortune 
they instantly departed, and came and told the 
army what they had witnessed. 

80. When, therefore, Scylas, after leaving 
Borysthenes, was about returning home, the 
Scythians broke out into revolt. They put at 
their head Octamasadas, grandson (on the 
mother’s side) of Teres. Then Scylas, when he 
learned the danger with which he was threat¬ 
ened, and the reason of the disturbance, made 
his escape to Thrace. Octamasadas, discover¬ 
ing whither he had fled, marched after him, 
and had reached the Ister, when he was met 
by the forces of the Thracians. The two armies 
were about to engage, but before they joined 
battle, Sitalces sent a message to Octamasadas 
to this effiect—“Why should there be trial of 
arms betwixt thee and me.?^ Thou art my own 


sister’s son, and thou hast in thy keeping my 
brother. Surrender him into my hands, and I , 
will give thy Scylas back to thee. So neither 
thou nor I will risk our armies.” Sitalces sent ^ 
this message to Octamasadas, by a herald, and 
Octamasadas, with whom a brother of Sitalces | 
had formerly taken refuge, accepted the terms. 

He surrendered his own uncle to Sitalces, and 
obtained in exchange his brother Scylas. Sital- j 
ces took his brother with him and withdrew; 
but Octamasadas beheaded Scylas upon the 
spot. Thus rigidly do the Scythians maintain 
their own customs, and thus severely do they 
punish such as adopt foreign usages. 

81. What the population of Scythia is I was i 
not able to learn with certainty; the accounts 1 
which I received varied from one another. I 
heard from some that they were very numer¬ 
ous indeed; others made their numbers but 
scanty for such a nation as the Scyths. Thus » 
much, however, I witnessed with my own 
eyes. There is a tract called Exampaeus between ) 
the Borysthenes and the Hypanis. I made some \ 
mention of it in a former place, where I spoke 

of the bitter stream which rising there flows 
into the Hypanis, and renders the water of 
that river undrinkable. Here then stands a 
brazen bowl, six times as big as that at the en¬ 
trance of the Euxine, which Pausanias, the son 
of Cleombrotus, set up. Such as have never I 
seen that vessel may understand me better if I 
say that the Scythian bowl holds with ease six 
hundred amphonx,^ and is of the thickness of 
six fingers’ breadth. The natives gave me the 
following account of the manner in which it ' 
was made. One of their kings, by name Arian- 
tas, wishing to know the number of his sub¬ 
jects, ordered them all to bring him, on pain 
of death, the point off one of their arrows, j 
They obeyed; and he collected thereby a vast j 
heap of arrow-heads, which he resolved to 
form into a memorial that might go down to 
posterity. Accordingly he made of them this 
bowl, and dedicated it at Exampaeus. This was 
all that I could learn concerning the number of 
the Scythians. 

82. The country has no marvels except its 
rivers, which are larger and more numerous 
than those of any other land. These, and the I 
vastness of the great plain, are worthy of note, 
and one thing besides, which I am about to ' 
mention. They show a footmark of Hercules, 

^ The Greek amphora (d/x0opeus) contained 
nearly nine of our gallons; whence it appears that 
this bowl would have held about 5400 gallons, or 
above 85 hogsheads. 







79 -^8] THE HISTORY 139 


impressed on a rock, in shape like the print of 
a man’s foot, but two cubits in length. It is in 
the neighbourhood of the Tyras. Having de¬ 
scribed this, I return to the subject on which I 
originally proposed to discourse. 

83. The preparations of Darius against the 
Scythians had begun, messengers had been des¬ 
patched on all sides with the king’s commands, 
some being required to furnish troops, others 
to supply ships, others again to bridge the 
Thracian Bosphorus, when Artabanus, son of 
Hystaspes and brother of Darius, entreated the 
king to desist from his expedition, urging on 
him the great difficulty of attacking Scythia. 
Good, however, as the advice of Artabanus 
was, it failed to persuade Darius. He therefore 
ceased his reasonings; and Darius, when his 
preparations were complete, led his army forth 
from Susa. 

84. It was then that a certain Persian, by 
name CEobazus, the father of three sons, all of 
whom were to accompany the army, came and 
prayed the king that he would allow one of 
his sons to remain with him. Darius made an¬ 
swer, as if he regarded him in the light of a 
friend who had urged a moderate request, 
“that he would allow them all to remain.” CEo¬ 
bazus was overjoyed, expecting that all his chil¬ 
dren would be excused from serving; the king, 
however, bade his attendants take the three 
sons of CEobazus and forthwith put them to 
death. Thus they were all left behind, but not 
till they had been deprived of life. 

85. When Darius, on his march from Susa, 
reached the territory of Chalcedon on the 
shores of the Bosphorus, where the bridge had 
been made, he took ship and sailed thence to 
the Cyanean islands, which, according to the 
Greeks, once floated. He took his seat also in 
the temple and surveyed the Pontus, which is 
indeed well worthy of consideration. There is 
not in the world any other sea so wonderful: 
it extends in length eleven thousand one hun¬ 
dred furlongs, and its breadth, at the widest 
part, is three thousand three hundred. The 
mouth is but four furlongs wide; and this 
strait, called the Bosphorus, and across which 
the bridge of Darius had been thrown, is a hun¬ 
dred and twenty furlongs in length, reaching 
from the Euxine to the Propontis. The Pro¬ 
pontis is five hundred furlongs across, and 
fourteen hundred long. Its waters flow into the 
Hellespont, the length of which is four hun¬ 
dred furlongs, and the width no more than 
seven. The Hellespont opens into the wide sea 
called the Egean. 


86. The mode in which these distances have 
been measured is the following. In a long 
day a vessel generally accomplishes about sev¬ 
enty thousand fathoms, in the night sixty thou¬ 
sand. Now from the mouth of the Pontus to 
the river Phasis, which is the extreme length 
of this sea, is a voyage of nine days and eight 
nights, which makes the distance one million 
one hundred and ten thousand fathoms, or 
eleven thousand one hundred furlongs. Again, 
from Sindica, to Themiscyra on the river Ther- 
modon, where the Pontus is wider than at any 
other place, is a sail of three days and two 
nights; which makes three hundred and thirty 
thousand fathoms, or three thousand three 
hundred furlongs. Such is the plan on which I 
have measured the Pontus, the Bosphorus, and 
the Hellespont, and such is the account which 
I have to give of them. The Pontus has also a 
lake belonging to it, not very much inferior to 
itself in size. The waters of this lake run into 
the Pontus: it is called the Maeotis, and also the 
Mother of the Pontus. 

87. Darius, after he had finished his survey, 
sailed back to the bridge, which had been con¬ 
structed for him by Mandrocles a Samian. He 
likewise surveyed the Bosphorus, and erected 
upon its shores two pillars of white marble, 
whereupon he inscribed the names of all the 
nations which formed his army—on the one 
pillar in Greek, on the other in Assyrian char¬ 
acters. Now his army was drawn from all the 
nations under his sway; and the whole amount, 
without reckoning the naval forces, was seven 
hundred thousand men, including cavalry. 
The fleet consisted of six hundred ships. Some 
time afterwards the Byzantines removed these 
pillars to their own city, and used them for an 
altar which they erected to Orthosian Diana. 
One block remained behind: it lay near the 
temple of Bacchus at Byzantium, and was cov¬ 
ered with Assyrian writing. The spot where 
Darius bridged the Bosphorus was, I think, 
but I speak only from conjecture, half-way be¬ 
tween the city of Byzantium and the temple at 
the mouth of the strait. 

88. Darius was so pleased with the bridge 
thrown across the strait by the Samian Man¬ 
drocles, that he not only bestowed upon him 
all the customary presents, but gave him ten of 
every kind. Mandrocles, by the way of ofier- 
ing first-fruits from these presents, caused a pic¬ 
ture to be painted which showed the whole of 
the bridge, with King Darius sitting in a seat 
of honour, and his army engaged in the pas¬ 
sage. This painting he dedicated in the temple 


140 HERODOTUS [ Book iv 


of Juno at Samos, attaching to it the inscription 
following:— 

The fish-jraught Bosphorus bridged, to Jtino^s fane 

Did Mandroc/es this proud memorial bring; 
When for himself a crown he\l skjll to gain, 

For Samos praise, contenting the Great King. 
Such was the memorial of his work which was 
left by the architect of the bridge. 

89. Darius, after rewarding Mandrocles, 
passed into Europe, while he ordered the loni- 
ans to enter the Pontus, and sail to the mouth 
of the Ister. There he bade them throw a 
bridge across the stream and await his coming. 
The lonians, iEolians, and Hellespontians 
were the nations which furnished the chief 
strength of his navy. So the fleet, threading the 
Cyanean Isles, proceeded straight to the Ister, 
and, mounting the river to the point where its 
channels separate, a distance of two days’ voy¬ 
age from the sea, yoked the neck of the stream. 
Meantime Darius, who had crossed the Bos¬ 
phorus by the bridge over it, marched through 
Thrace; and happening upon the sources of the 
Tearus, pitched his camp and made a stay of 
three days. 

90. Now the Tearus is said by those who 
dwell near it, to be the most healthful of all 
streams, and to cure, among other diseases, the 
scab either in man or beast. Its sources, which 
are eight and thirty in number, all flowing 
from the same rock, are in part cold, in part 
hot. They lie at an equal distance from the 
town of Heraeum near Perinthus, and Apol- 
lonia on the Euxine, a two days’ journey from 
each. This river, the Tearus, is a tributary of 
the Contadesdus, which runs into the Agri- 
anes, and that into the Hebrus. The Hebrus 
empties itself into the sea near the city of 
/Enus. 

91. Here then, on the banks of the Tearus, 
Darius stopped and pitched his camp. The riv¬ 
er charmed him so, that he caused a pillar to 
be erected in this place also, with an inscrip¬ 
tion to the following effect: “The fountains of 
the Tearus afford the best and most beautiful 
water of all rivers: they were visited, on his 
march into Scythia, by the best and most beau¬ 
tiful of men, Darius, son of Hystaspes, king of 
the Persians, and of the whole continent.” 
Such was the inscription which he set up at 
this place. 

92. Marching thence, he came to a second 
river, called the Artiscus, which flows through 
the country of the Odrysians. Here he fixed 
upon a certain spot, where every one of his 
soldiers should throw a stone as he passed by. 


When his orders were obeyed, Darius contin¬ 
ued his march, leaving behind him great hills 
formed of the stones cast by his troops. 

93. Before arriving at the Ister, the first peo¬ 

ple whom he subdued were the Getae, who be¬ 
lieve in their immortality. The Thracians of 
Salmydessus, and those who dwelt above the f 
cities of Apollonia and Mesembria—the Scyr- 
miadae and Nipsxans, as they are called—gave 1 

themselves up to Darius without a struggle; i 
but the Gets obstinately defending themselves, 
were forthwith enslaved, notwithstanding that 
they are the noblest as well as the most just of 
all the Thracian tribes. < 

94. The belief of the Getae in respect of im- -1 

mortality is the following. They think that , 

they do not really die, but that when they de- \ 

part this life they go to Zalmoxis, who is called I 

also Gebeleizis by some among them. To this 
god every five years they send a messenger, j 

who is chosen by lot out of the whole nation, J 

and charged to bear him their several requests. i 

Their mode of sending him is this. A number \\ 

of them stand in order, each holding in his I- 

hand diree darts; others take the man who is | 

to be sent to Zalmoxis, and swinging him by ^ 

his hands and feet, toss him into the air so that 

he falls upon the points of the weapons. If he is 
pierced and dies, they think that the god is pro¬ 
pitious to them; but if not, they lay the fault on 
the messenger, who (they say) is a wicked 
man: and so they choose another to send away. 
The messages are given while the man is still 
alive. This same people, when it lightens and 
thunders, aim their arrows at the sky, uttering 
threats against the god; and they do not believe 
that there is any god but their own. 

95. I am told by the Greeks who dwell on 1 
the shores of the Hellespont and the Pontus, 
that this Zalmoxis was in reality a man, that he 
lived at Samos, and while there was the slave | 
of Pythagoras son of Mnesarchus. After ob- f 
taining his freedom he grew rich, and leaving ( 
Samos, returned to his own country. The j 
Thracians at that time lived in a wretched way, I 
and were a poor ignorant race; Zalmoxis, 
therefore, who by his commerce with the 
Greeks, and especially with one who was by 
no means their most contemptible philosopher, 
Pythagoras to wit, was acquainted with the 
Ionic mode of life and with manners more re¬ 
fined than those current among his country- 1 
men, had a chamber built, in which from time || 
to time he received and feasted all the princi- I 
pal Thracians, using the occasion to teach them I 
that neither he, nor they, his boon companions, I 








89 - 99 ] the history 141 


nor any of their posterity would ever perish, 
but that they would all go to a place where 
they would live for aye in the enjoyment of 
every conceivable good. While he was acting in 
this way, and holding this kind of discourse, 
he was constructing an apartment under¬ 
ground, into which, when it was completed, he 
withdrew, vanishing suddenly from the eyes of 
the Thracians, who greatly regretted his loss, 
and mourned over him as one dead. He mean¬ 
while abode in his secret chamber three full 
years, after which he came forth from his con¬ 
cealment, and showed himself once more to his 
countrymen, who were thus brought to believe 
in the truth of what he had taught them. Such 
is the account of the Greeks. 

96. I for my part neither put entire faith in 
this story of Zalmoxis and his underground 
chamber, nor do I altogether discredit it: but I 
believe Zalmoxis to have lived long before the 
time of Pythagoras. Whether there was ever 
really a man of the name, or whether Zalmoxis 
is nothing but a native god of the Getae, I now 
bid him farewell. As for the Getae themselves, 
the people who observe the practices described 
above, they were now reduced by the Persians, 
and accompanied the army of Darius. 

97. When Darius, with his land forces, 
reached the Ister, he made his troops cross the 
stream, and after all were gone over gave or¬ 
ders to the lonians to break the bridge, and fol¬ 
low him with the whole naval force in his 
land march. They were about to obey his com¬ 
mand, when the general of the Mytilenaeans, 
Coes son of Erxander, having first asked 
whether it was agreeable to the king to listen 
to one who wished to speak his mind, ad¬ 
dressed him in the words following:—“Thou 
art about. Sire, to attack a country no part of 
which is cultivated, and wherein there is not a 
single inhabited city. Keep this bridge, then, as 
it is, and leave those who built it to watch over 
it. So if we come up with the Scythians and 
succeed against them as we could wish, we 
may return by this route; or if we fail of find¬ 
ing them, our retreat will still be secure. For I 
have no fear lest the Scythians defeat us in 
battle, but my dread is lest we be unable to dis¬ 
cover them, and suffer loss while we wander 
about their territory. And now, mayhap, it 
will be said, I advise thee thus in the hope of 
being myself allowed to remain behind; but in 
truth I have no other design than to recom¬ 
mend the course which seems to me the best; 
nor will I consent to be among those left be¬ 
hind, but my resolve is, in any case, to follow 


thee.” The advice of Coes pleased Darius high¬ 
ly, who thus replied to him:—“Dear Lesbian, 
when I am safe home again in my palace, be 
sure thou come to me, and with good deeds 
will I recompense thy good words of to day.” 

98. Having so said, the king took a leathern 
thong, and tying sixty knots in it, called to¬ 
gether the Ionian tyrants, and spoke thus to 
them:—“Men of Ionia, my former commands 
to you concerning the bridge are now with¬ 
drawn. See, here is a thong: take it, and ob¬ 
serve my bidding with respect to it. From the 
time that I leave you to march forward into 
Scythia, untie every day one of the knots. If 1 
do not return before the last day to which the 
knots will hold out, then leave your station, 
and sail to your several homes. Meanwhile, un¬ 
derstand that my resolve is changed, and that 
you are to guard the bridge with all care, and 
watch over its safety and preservation. By so 
doing ye will oblige me greatly.” When Darius 
had thus spoken, he set out on his march with 
all speed. 

99. Before you come to Scythia, on the sea 
coast, lies Thrace. The land here makes a 
sweep, and then Scythia begins, the Ister fall¬ 
ing into the sea at this point with its mouth 
facing the east. Starting from the Ister I shall 
now describe the measurements of the sea¬ 
shore of Scythia. Immediately that the Ister is 
crossed. Old Scythia begins, and continues as 
far as the city called Carcinitis, fronting to¬ 
wards the south wind and the mid-day. Here 
upon the same sea, there lies a mountainous 
tract projecting into the Pontus, which is in¬ 
habited by the Tauri, as far as what is called 
the Rugged Chersonese, which runs out into 
the sea upon the east. For the boundaries of 
Scythia extend on two sides to two different 
seas, one upon the south, and the other to¬ 
wards the east, as is also the case with Attica. 
And the Tauri occupy a position in Scythia 
like that which a people would hold in Attica, 
who, being foreigners and not Athenians, 
should inhabit the high land of Sunium, from 
Thoricus to the township of Anaphlystus, if 
this tract projected into the sea somewhat fur¬ 
ther than it does. Such, to compare great things 
with small, is the Tauric territory. For the sake 
of those who may not have made the voyage 
round these parts of Attica, I will illustrate in 
another way. It is as if in lapygia a line were 
drawn from Port Brundusium to Tarentum, 
and a people different from the lapygians in¬ 
habited the promontory. These two instances 
may suggest a number of others where the 


142 HERODOTUS [Bookiv 


shape of the land closely resembles that of 
Taurica. 

100. Beyond this tract, we find the Scyth¬ 
ians again in possession of the country above 
the Tauri and the parts bordering on the east¬ 
ern sea, as also of the whole district lying west 
of the Cimmerian Bosphorus and the Palus 
Maeotis, as far as the river Tanais, which emp¬ 
ties itself into that lake at its upper end. As for 
the inland boundaries of Scythia, if we start 
from the Ister, we find it enclosed by the fol¬ 
lowing tribes, first the Agathyrsi, next the 
Neuri, then the Androphagi, and last of all, the 
Melanchlaeni. 

101. Scythia then, which is square in shape, 
and has two of its sides reaching down to the 
sea, extends inland to the same distance that it 
stretches along the coast, and is equal every 
way. For it is a ten days’ journey from the Ister 
to the Borysthenes, and ten more from the 
Borysthenes to the Palus Mxotis, while the 
distance from the coast inland to the country 
of the Melanchlaeni, who dwell above Scythia, 
is a journey of twenty days. I reckon the day’s 
journey at two hundred furlongs. Thus the two 
sides which run straight inland are four thou¬ 
sand furlongs each, and the transverse sides at 
right angles to these are also of the same 
length, which gives the full size of Scythia. 

102. The Scythians, reflecting on their situa¬ 
tion, perceived that they were not strong 
enough by themselves to contend with the 
army of Darius in open fight. They, therefore, 
sent envoys to the neighbouring nations, whose 
kings had already met, and were in consulta¬ 
tion upon the advance of so vast a host. Now 
they who had come together were the kings of 
the Tauri, the Agathyrsi, the Neuri, the An¬ 
drophagi, the Melanchlaeni, the Geldni, the 
Budini, and the Sauromatae. 

103. The Tauri have the following customs. 
They offer in sacrifice to the Virgin all ship¬ 
wrecked persons, and all Greeks compelled to 
put into their ports by stress of weather. The 
mode of sacrifice is this. After the preparatory 
ceremonies, they strike the victim on the head 
with a club. Then, according to some accounts, 
they hurl the trunk from the precipice where¬ 
on the temple stands, and nail the head to a 
cross. Others grant that the head is treated in 
this way, but deny that the body is thrown 
down the cliff—on the contrary, they say, it is 
buried. The goddess to whom these sacrifices 
are offered the Tauri themselves declare to be 
Iphigenia the daughter of Agamemnon. When 
they take prisoners in war they treat them in 


the following way. The man who has taken a 
captive cuts off his head, and carrying it to his 
home, fixes it upon a tall pole, which he ele¬ 
vates above his house, most commonly over the 
chimney. The reason that the heads are set up 
so high, is (it is said) in order that the whole ; 
house may be under their protection. These 
people live entirely by war and plundering. 

104. The Agathyrsi are a race of men very 

luxurious, and very fond of wearing gold on 1 
their persons. They have wives in common, 
that so they may be all brothers, and, as mem¬ 
bers of one family, may neither envy nor hate .i 
one another. In other respects their customs ap¬ 
proach nearly to those of the Thracians. ), 

105. The Neurian customs are like the ! 
Scythian. One generation before the attack of 
Darius they were driven from their land by a 
huge multitude of serpents which invaded ( 
them. Of these some were produced in their 
own country, while others, and those by far the . 
greater number, came in from the deserts on | 
the north. Suffering grievously beneath this ( 
scourge, they quitted their homes, and took |1 
refuge with the Budini. It seems that these peo- I 
pie are conjurers: for both the Scythians and || 
the Greeks who dwell in Scythia say that every 
Neurian once a year becomes a wolf for a few I 
days, at the end of which time he is restored to * 
his proper shape. Not that I believe this, but j 
they constantly affirm it to be true, and are | 
even ready to back their assertion with an oath. 

106. The manners of the Androphagi^ are 
more savage than those of any other race. They 
neither observe justice, nor are governed by ' 
any laws. They are nomads, and their dress is 
Scythian; but the language which they speak 

is peculiar to themselves. Unlike any other na¬ 
tion in these parts, they are cannibals. 

107. The Melanchlarni^ wear, all of them, 
black cloaks, and from this derive the name 
which they bear. Their customs are Scythic. 

108. The Budini are a large and powerful 1 
nation: they have all deep blue eyes, and bright I 
red hair. There is a city in their territory, called 
Gelonus, which is surrounded with a lofty 
wall, thirty furlongs each way, built entirely of 
wood. All the houses in the place and all the 
temples are of the same material. Here are 
temples built in honour of the Grecian gods, 
and adorned after the Greek fashion with im¬ 
ages, altars, and shrines, all in wood. There is ‘ 
even a festival, held every third year in hon¬ 
our of Bacchus, at which the natives fall into 

^ Or “Men-caters.” 

^ Or “Black-cloaks.” r 






I00-II4] THE HISTORY 143 


the Bacchic fury. For the fact is that the Gel- 
oni were anciently Greeks, who, being driven 
out of the factories along the coast, fled to the 
Budini and took up their abode with them. 
They still speak a language half Greek, half 
Scythian. 

109. The Budini, however, do not speak the 
same language as the Geloni, nor is their mode 
of life the same. They are the aboriginal peo¬ 
ple of the country, and are nomads; unlike any 
of the neighbouring races, they eat lice. The 
Geloni, on the contrary, are tillers of the soil, 
eat bread, have gardens, and both in shape and 
complexion are quite different from the Bu¬ 
dini. The Greeks notwithstanding call these 
latter Geloni; but it is a mistake to give them 
the name. Their country is thickly planted 
with trees of all manner of kinds. In the very 
woodiest part is a broad deep lake, surrounded 
by marshy ground with reeds growing on it. 
Here otters are caught, and beavers, with an¬ 
other sort of animal which has a square face. 
With the skins of this last the natives border 
their capotes: and they also get from them a 
remedy, which is of virtue in diseases of the 
womb. 

no. It is reported of the Sauromatae, that 
when the Greeks fought with the Amazons, 
whom the Scythians call Oior-pata or “man- 
slayers,” as it may be rendered, Dior being 
Scythic for “man,” and pata for “to slay”—it is 
reported, I say, that the Greeks after gaining 
the battle of the Thermodon, put to sea, taking 
with them on board three of their vessels all the 
Amazons whom they had made prisoners; and 
that these women upon the voyage rose up 
against the crews, and massacred them to a 
man. As however they were quite strange to 
ships, and did not know how to use either rud¬ 
der, sails, or oars, they were carried, after the 
death of the men, where the winds and the 
waves listed. At last they reached the shores of 
the Palus Maeotis and came to a place called 
Cremni or “the Cliffs,” which is in the country 
of the free Scythians. Here they went ashore, 
and proceeded by land towards the inhabited 
regions; the first herd of horses which they fell 
in with they seized, and mounting upon their 
backs, fell to plundering the Scythian terri¬ 
tory. 

III. The Scyths could not tell what to make 
of the attack upon them—the dress, the lan¬ 
guage, the nation itself, were alike unknown 
—whence the enemy had come even, was a 
marvel. Imagining, however, that they were all 
men of about the same age, they went out 


against them, and fought a battle. Some of the 
bodies of the slain fell into their hands, where¬ 
by they discovered the truth. Hereupon they 
deliberated, and made a resolve to kill no more 
of them, but to send against them a detach¬ 
ment of their youngest men, as near as they 
could guess equal to the women in number, 
with orders to encamp in their neighbourhood, 
and do as they saw them do—when the Ama¬ 
zons advanced against them, they were to re¬ 
tire, and avoid a fight—when they halted, the 
young men were to approach and pitch their 
camp near the camp of the enemy. All this they 
did on account of their strong desire to obtain 
children from so notable a race. 

112. So the youths departed, and obeyed the 
orders which had been given them. The Ama¬ 
zons soon found out that they had not come to 
do them any harm; and so they on their part 
ceased to offer the Scythians any molestation. 
And now day after day the camps approached 
nearer to one another; both parties led the same 
life, neither having anything but their arms 
and horses, so that they were forced to support 
themselves by hunting and pillage. 

113. At last an incident brought two of them 
together—the man easily gained the good 
graces of the woman, who bade him by signs 
(for they did not understand each other’s lan¬ 
guage) to bring a friend the next day to the 
spot where they had met—promising on her 
part to bring with her another woman. He did 
so, and the woman kept her word. When the 
rest of the youths heard what had taken place, 
they also sought and gained the favour of the 
other Amazons. 

114. The two camps were then joined in 
one, the Scythians living with the Amazons as 
their wives; and the men were unable to learn 
the tongue of the women, but the women soon 
caught up the tongue of the men. When they 
could thus understand one another, the Scyths 
addressed the Amazons in these words—“We 
have parents, and properties, let us therefore 
give up this mode of life, and return to our na¬ 
tion, and live with them. You shall be our 
wives there no less than here, and we promise 
you to have no others.” But the Amazons said 
—“We could not live with your women—our 
customs are quite different from theirs. To 
draw the bow, to hurl the javelin, to bestride 
the horse, these are our arts—of womanly em¬ 
ployments we know nothing. Your women, on 
the contrary, do none of these things; but stay 
at home in their waggons, engaged in woman¬ 
ish tasks, and never go out to hunt, or to do 


144 HERODOTUS I Book iv 


anything. We should never agree together. But 
if you truly wish to keep us as your wives, and 
would conduct yourselves with strict justice 
towards us, go you home to your parents, bid 
them give you your inheritance, and then come 
back to us, and let us and you live together by 
ourselves.” 

115. The youths approved of the advice, and 
followed it. They went and got the portion of 
goods which fell to them, returned with it, and 
rejoined their wives, who then addressed them 
in these words following:—‘ We are ashamed, 
and afraid to live in the country where we now 
are. Not only have we stolen you from your 
fathers, but we have done great damage to 
Scythia by our ravages. As you like us for 
wives, grant the request we make of you. Let 
us leave this country together, and go and 
dwell beyond the Tanais.” Again the youths 
complied. 

116. Crossing the Tanais they journeyed 
eastward a distance of three days’ march from 
that stream, and again northward a distance of 
three days’ march from the Palus Maeotis. Here 
they came to the country where they now live, 
and took up their abode in it. The women of 
the Sauromatae have continued from that day 
to the present to observe their ancient customs, 
frequently hunting on horseback with their 
husbands, sometimes even unaccompanied; in 
war taking the held; and wearing the very 
same dress as the men. 

117. The Sauromatse speak the language of 
Scythia, but have never talked it correctly, be¬ 
cause the Amazons learnt it imperfectly at the 
hrst. Their marriage-law lays it down that no 
girl shall wed till she has killed a man in bat¬ 
tle. Sometimes it happens that a woman dies 
unmarried at an advanced age, having never 
been able in her whole lifetime to fulhl the 
condition. 

118. The envoys of the Scythians, on being 
introduced into the presence of the kings of 
these nations, who were assembled to deliber¬ 
ate, made it known to them that the Persian, 
after subduing the whole of the other conti¬ 
nent, had thrown a bridge over the strait of the 
Bosphorus, and crossed into the continent of 
Europe, where he had reduced the Thracians, 
and was now making a bridge over the Ister, 
his aim being to bring under his sway all Eu¬ 
rope also. “Stand ye not aloof then from this 
contest,” they went on to say, “look not on 
tamely while we are perishing—but make 
common cause with us, and together let us 
meet the enemy. If ye refuse, we must yield to 


the pressure, and either quit our country, or 
make terms with the invaders. For what else is 
left for us to do, if your aid be withheld from 
us? The blow, be sure, will not light on you 
more gently upon this account. The Persian 
comes against you no less than against us: and 
will not be content, after we are conquered, to 
leave you in peace. We can bring strong proof 
of what we here advance. Had the Persian 
leader indeed come to avenge the wrongs 
which he suffered at our hands when we en¬ 
slaved his people, and to war on us only, he 
would have been bound to march straight 
upon Scythia, without molesting any nation by 
the way. Then it would have been plain to all 
that Scythia alone was aimed at. But now, 
what has his conduct been? From the moment 
of his entrance into Europe, he has subjugated 
without exception every nation that lay in his 
path. All the tribes of the Thracians have been 
brought under his sway, and among them even 
our next neighbours, the Getae.” 

119. The assembled princes of the nations, 
after hearing all that the Scythians had to say, 
deliberated. At the end opinion was divided 
—the kings of the Geloni, Budini, and Sauro- 
mat:e were of accord, and pledged themselves 
to give assistance to the Scythians; but the Aga- 
thyrsian and Neurian princes, together with 
the sovereigns of the Androphagi, the Melan- 
chlaeni, and the Tauri, replied to their request 
as follows:—“If you had not been the first to 
wrong the Persians, and begin the war, we 
should have thought the request you make 
just; we should then have complied with your 
wishes, and joined our arms with yours. Now, 
however, the case stands thus—you, indepen¬ 
dently of us, invaded the land of the Persians, 
and so long as God gave you the power, lorded 
it over them: raised up now by the same God, 
they are come to do to you the like. We, on 
our part, did no wrong to these men in the for¬ 
mer war, and will not be the first to commit 
wrong now. If they invade our land, and be¬ 
gin aggressions upon us, we will not suffer 
them; but, till we see this come to pass, we will 
remain at home. For we believe that the Per¬ 
sians are not come to attack us, but to punish 
those who are guilty of first injuring them.” 

120. When this reply reached the Scythians, 
they resolved, as the neighbouring nations re¬ 
fused their alliance, that they would not openly 
venture on any pitched battle with the enemy, 
but would retire before them, driving off their 
herds, choking up all the wells and springs as 
they retreated, and leaving the whole country 








II5-I25] 

bare of forage. They divided themselves into 
three bands, one of which, namely, that com¬ 
manded by Scopasis, it was agreed should be 
joined by the Saurom.atac, and if the Persians 
advanced in the direction of the Tanais, should 
retreat along the shores of the Palus Maeotis 
and make for that river; while if the Persians 
retired, they should at once pursue and harass 
them. The two other divisions, the principal 
one under the command of Idanthyrsus, and 
the third, of which Taxacis was king, were to 
unite in one, and, joined by the detachments of 
the Geloni and Budini, were, like the others, to 
keep at the distance of a day’s march from the 
Persians, falling back as they advanced, and 
doing the same as the others. And first, they 
were to take the direction of the nations which 
had refused to join the alliance, and were to 
draw the war upon them: that so, if they would 
not of their own free will engage in the con¬ 
test, they might by these means be forced into 
it. Afterwards, it was agreed that they should 
retire into their own land, and, should it on de¬ 
liberation appear to them expedient, join battle 
with the enemy. 

121. When these measures had been deter¬ 
mined on, the Scythians went out to meet the 
army of Darius, sending on in front as scouts 
the fleetest of their horsemen. Their waggons, 
wherein their women and their children lived, 
and all their cattle, except such a number as 
was wanted for food, which they kept with 
them, were made to precede them in their re¬ 
treat, and departed, with orders to keep march¬ 
ing, without change of course, to the north. 

122. The scouts of the Scythians found the 
Persian host advanced three days’ march from 
the Ister, and immediately took the lead of 
them at the distance of a day’s march, encamp¬ 
ing from time to time, and destroying all that 
grew on the ground. The Persians no sooner 
caught sight of the Scythian horse than they 
pursued upon their track, while the enemy re¬ 
tired before them. The pursuit of the Persians 
was directed towards the single division of the 
Scythian army, and thus their line of march 
was eastward toward the Tanais. The Scyths 
crossed the river, and the Persians after them, 
still in pursuit. In this way they passed through 
the country of the Sauromatae, and entered 
that of the Budini. 

123. As long as the march of the Persian 
army lay through the countries of the Scythians 
and Sauromatae, there was nothing which they 
could damage, the land being waste and bar¬ 
ren; but on entering the territories of the Bu- 


145 

dini, they came upon the wooden fortress above 
mentioned, which was deserted by its inhabi¬ 
tants and left quite empty of everything. This 
place they burnt to the ground; and having so 
done, again pressed forward on the track of the 
retreating Scythians, till, having passed 
through the entire country of the Budini, they 
reached the desert, which has no inhabitants, 
and extends a distance of seven days’ journey 
above the Budinian territory. Beyond this des¬ 
ert dwell the Thyssageta!, out of whose land 
four great streams flow. These rivers all tra¬ 
verse the country of the Maeotians, and fall into 
the Palus Maeotis. Their names are the Lycus, 
the Oarus, the Tanais, and the Syrgis. 

124. When Darius reached the desert, he 
paused from his pursuit, and halted his army 
upon the Oarus. Here he built eight large forts, 
at an equal distance from one another, sixty 
furlongs apart or thereabouts, the ruins of 
which were still remaining in my day. During 
the time that he was so occupied, the Scythians 
whom he had been following made a ci^-cuit 
by the higher regions, and re-entered Scythia. 
On their complete disappearance, Darius, see¬ 
ing nothing more of them, left his forts half 
finished, and returned towards the west. He 
imagined that the Scythians whom he had 
seen were the entire nation, and that they had 
fled in that direction. 

125. He now quickened his march, and 
entering Scythia, fell in with the two com¬ 
bined divisions of the Scythian army, and in¬ 
stantly gave them chase. They kept to their 
plan of retreating before him at the distance of 
a day’s march; and, he still following them 
hotly, they led him, as had been previously 
settled, into the territories of the nations that 
had refused to become their alHes, and first of 
all into the country of the Melanchlreni. Great 
disturbance was caused among this people by 
the invasion of the Scyths first, and then of the 
Persians. So, having harassed them after this 
sort, the Scythians led the way into the land of 
the Androphagi, with the same result as be¬ 
fore; and thence passed onwards into Neuris, 
where their coming likewise spread dismay 
among the inhabitants. Still retreating they ap¬ 
proached the Agathyrsi; but this people, which 
had witnessed the flight and terror of their 
neighbours, did not wait for the Scyths to in¬ 
vade them, but sent a herald to forbid them to 
cross their borders, and to forewarn them, 
that, if they made the attempt, it would be re¬ 
sisted by force of arms. The Agathyrsi then 
proceeded to the frontier, to defend their coun- 


THE HISTORY 


146 HERODOTUS TBookiv 


try against the invaders. As for the other na¬ 
tions, the MelanchLeni, the Androphagi, and 
the Neuri, instead of defending themselves, 
when the Scyths and Persians overran their 
lands, they forgot their threats and fled away 
in confusion to the deserts lying towards the 
north. The Scythians, when the Agathyrsi for¬ 
bade them to enter their country, refrained; 
and led the Persians back from the Neurian 
district into their own land. 

126. This had gone on so long, and seemed 
so interminable, that Darius at last sent a horse¬ 
man to Idanthyrsus, the Scythian king, with 
the following message:—“Thou strange man, 
why dost thou keep on flying before me, when 
there are two things thou mightest do so eas¬ 
ily? If thou deemest thyself able to resist my 
arms, cease thy wanderings and come, let us 
engage in battle. Or if thou art conscious that 
my strength is greater than thine—even so 
thou shouldest cease to run away—thou hast 
but to bring thy lord earth and water, and to 
come at once to a conference.” 

127. To this message Idanthyrsus, the Scyth¬ 
ian king, replied—“This is my way, Persian. 
I never fear men or fly from them. I have not 
done so in times past, nor do I now fly from 
thee. There is nothing new or strange in what 
I do; I only follow my common mode of life in 
peaceful years. Now I will tell thee why I do 
not at once join battle with thee. We Scythians 
have neither towns nor cultivated lands, which 
might induce us, through fear of their being 
taken or ravaged, to be in any hurry to fight 
with you. If, however, you must needs come to 
blows with us speedily, look you now, there 
are our fathers’ tombs—seek them out, and 
attempt to meddle with them—then ye shall 
see whether or no we will fight with you. Till 
ye do this, be sure we shall not join battle, un¬ 
less it pleases us. This is my answer to the chal¬ 
lenge to fight. As for lords, I acknowledge only 
Jove my ancestor, and Vesta, the Scythian 
queen. Earth and water, the tribute thou 
askedst, I do not send, but thou shalt soon re¬ 
ceive more suitable gifts. Last of all, in return 
for thy calling thyself my lord, I say to thee, 
‘Go weep.’” (This is what men mean by the 
Scythian mode of speech.) So the herald de¬ 
parted, bearing this message to Darius. 

128. When the Scythian kings heard the 
name of slavery they were filled with rage, and 
despatched the division under Scopasis to 
which the Sauromata: were joined, with orders 
that they should seek a conference with the 
lonians, who had been left at the Ister to guard 


the bridge. Meanwhile the Scythians who re¬ 
mained behind resolved no longer to lead the 
Persians hither and thither about their coun¬ 
try, but to fall upon them whenever they 
should be at their meals. So they waited till 
such times, and then did as they had deter¬ 
mined. In these combats the Scythian horse 
always put to flight the horse of the enemy; 
these last, however, when routed, fell back 
upon their foot, who never failed to afiord 
them support; while the Scythians, on their 
side, as soon as they had driven the horse in, 
retired again, for fear of the foot. By night too 
the Scythians made many similar attacks. 

129. There was one very strange thing 
which greatly advantaged the Persians, and 
was of equal disservice to the Scyths, in these 
assaults on the Persian camp. This was the 
braying of the asses and the appearance of the 
mules. For, as I observed before, the land of the 
Scythians produces neither ass nor mule, and 
contains no single specimen of either animal, 
by reason of the cold. So, when the asses 
brayed, they frightened the Scythian cavalry; 
and often, in the middle of a charge, the 
horses, hearing the noise made by the asses, 
would take fright and wheel round, pricking 
up their ears, and showing astonishment. This 
was owing to their having never heard the 
noise, or seen the form, of the animal before: 
and it was not without some little influence on 
the progress of the war. 

130. The Scythians, when they perceived 
signs that the Persians were becoming alarmed, 
took steps to induce them not to quit Scythia, 
in the hope, if they stayed, of inflicting on 
them the greater injury, when their supplies 
should altogether fail. To effect this, they 
would leave some of their cattle exposed with 
the herdsmen, while they themselves moved 
away to a distance: the Persians would make a 
foray, and take the beasts, whereupon they 
would be highly elated. 

131. This they did several times, until at 
last Darius was at his wits’ end; hereon the 
Scythian princes, understanding how matters 
stood, despatched a herald to the Persian camp 
with presents for the king: these were, a bird, 
a mouse, a frog, and five arrows. The Persians 
asked the bearer to tell them what these gifts 
might mean, but he made answer that he had 
no orders except to deliver them, and re¬ 
turn again with all speed. If the Persians were 
wise, he added, they would find out the mean¬ 
ing for themselves. So when they heard this, 
they held a council to consider the matter. 








126 - 136 J THE HISTORY 147 


132. Darius gave it as his opinion that the 
Scyths intended a surrender of themselves and 
their country, both land and water, into his 
hands. This he conceived to be the meaning of 
the gifts, because the mouse is an inhabitant of 
the earth, and eats the same food as man, while 
the frog passes his life in the water; the bird 
bears a great resemblance to the horse, and the 
arrows might signify the surrender of all their 
power. To the explanation of Darius, Gobryas, 
one of the seven conspirators against the Ma¬ 
gus, opposed another which was as follows:— 
“Unless, Persians, ye can turn into birds and 
fly up into the sky, or become mice and bur¬ 
row under the ground, or make yourselves 
frogs, and take refuge in the fens, ye will never 
make escape from this land, but die pierced by 
our arrows.” Such were the meanings which 
the Persians assigned to the gifts. 

133. The single division of the Scyths, which 
in the early part of the war had been appoint¬ 
ed to keep guard about the Palus Maeotis, and 
had now been sent to get speech of the lonians 
stationed at the Ister, addressed them, on 
reaching the bridge, in these words—“Men ot 
Ionia, we bring you freedom, if ye will only do 
as we recommend. Darius, we understand, en¬ 
joined you to keep your guard here at this 
bridge just sixty days; then, if he did not ap¬ 
pear, you were to return home. Now, there¬ 
fore, act so as to be free from blame, alike in 
his sight, and in ours. Tarry here the appointed 
time, and at the end go your ways.” Having 
said this, and received a promise from the 
lonians to do as they desired, the Scythians 
hastened back with all possible speed. 

134. After the sending of the gifts to Dari¬ 
us, the part of the Scythian army which had 
not marched to the Ister, drew out in battle 
array horse and foot against the Persians, and 
seemed about to come to an engagement. But 
as they stood in battle array, it chanced that a 
hare started up between them and the Per¬ 
sians, and set to running; when immediately 
all the Scyths who saw it, rushed oH in pur¬ 
suit, with great confusion and loud cries and 
shouts. Darius, hearing the noise, inquired the 
cause of it, and was told that the Scythians 
were all engaged in hunting a hare. On this 
he turned to those with whom he was wont to 
converse, and said:—“These men do indeed 
despise us utterly: and now I see that Gobryas 
was right about the Scythian gifts. As, there¬ 
fore, his opinion is now mine likewise, it is 
time we form some wise plan, whereby we 
may secure ourselves a safe return to our 


homes.” “Ah! sire,” Gobryas rejoined, “I was 
well nigh sure, ere I came here, that this was 
an impracticable race—since our coming I am 
yet more convinced of it, especially now that I 
see them making game of us. My advice is, 
therefore, that, when night falls, we light our 
fires as we are wont to do at other times, and 
leaving behind us on some pretext that portion 
of our army which is weak and unequal to 
hardship, taking care also to leave our asses 
tethered, retreat from Scythia, before our foes 
march forward to the Ister and destroy the 
bridge, or the lonians come to any resolution 
which may lead to our ruin.” 

135. So Gobryas advised; and when night 
came, Darius followed his counsel, and leaving 
his sick soldiers, and those whose loss would be 
of least account, with the asses also tethered 
about the camp, marched away. The asses were 
left that their noise might be heard: the men, 
really because they were sick and useless, but 
under the pretence that he was about to fall 
upon the Scythians with the flower of his 
troops, and that they meanwhile were to guard 
his camp for him. Having thus declared his 
plans to the men whom he was deserting, and 
having caused the fires to be lighted, Darius set 
forth, and marched hastily towards the Ister. 
The asses, aware of the departure of the host, 
brayed louder than ever; and the Scythians, 
hearing the sound, entertained no doubt of the 
Persians being still in the same place. 

136. When day dawned, the men who had 
been left behind, perceiving that they were be¬ 
trayed by Darius, stretched out their hands 
towards the Scythians, and spoke as befitted 
their situation. The enemy no sooner heard, 
than they quickly joined all their troops in one, 
and both portions of the Scythian army— 
alike that which consisted of a single division, 
and that made up of two—accompanied by all 
their allies, the Sauromatae, the Budini, and the 
Geloni, set ofi in pursuit, and made straight 
for the Ister. As, however, the Persian army 
was chiefly foot, and had no knowledge of the 
routes, which are not cut out in Scythia; while 
the Scyths were all horsemen and well ac¬ 
quainted with the shortest way; it so happened 
that the two armies missed one another, and 
the Scythians, getting far ahead of their adver¬ 
saries, came first to the bridge. Finding that the 
Persians were not yet arrived, they addressed 
the lonians, who were aboard their ships, in 
these words:—“Men of Ionia, the number of 
your days is out, and ye do wrong to remain. 
Fear doubtless has kept you here hitherto: 


148 

now, however, you may safely break the bridge, 
and hasten back to your homes, rejoicing that 
you are free, and thanking for it the gods and 
the Scythians. Your former lord and master 
we undertake so to handle, that he will never 
again make war upon any one.” 

137. The lonians now held a council. Miltia- 
des the Athenian, who was king of the Cherso- 
nesites upon the Hellespont, and their com¬ 
mander at the Ister, recommended the other 
generals to do as the Scythians wished, and re¬ 
store freedom to Ionia. But Histiaeus the Mile¬ 
sian opposed this advice. “It is through Dari¬ 
us,” he said, “that we enjoy our thrones in our 
several states. If his power be overturned, I 
cannot continue lord of Miletus, nor ye of your 
cities. For there is not one of them which will 
not prefer democracy to kingly rule.” Then the 
other captains, who, till Histiaeus spoke, were 
about to vote with Miltiades, changed their 
minds, and declared in favour of the last 
speaker. 

138. The following were the voters on this 
occasion—all of them men who stood high in 
the esteem of the Persian king: the tyrants of 
the Hellespont—Daphnis of Abydos, Hippoc- 
lus of Lampsacus, Herophantus of Parium, 
Metrodorus of Proconnesus, Aristagoras of 
Cyzicus, and Ariston of Byzantium; the Ionian 
princes—Strattis of Chios, .^aces of Samos, 
Laodamas of Phocaea, and Flistiaeus of Miletus, 
the man who had opposed Miltiades. Only one 
/Eolian of note was present, to wit, Aristagoras 
of Cyme. 

139. Having resolved to follow the advice of 
Histiaeus, the Greek leaders further deter¬ 
mined to speak and act as follows. In order to 
appear to the Scythians to be doing something, 
when in fact they were doing nothing of con¬ 
sequence, and likewise to prevent them from 
forcing a passage across the Ister by the bridge, 
they resolved to break up the part of the bridge 
which abutted on Scythia, to the distance of a 
bowshot from the river bank; and to assure 
the Scythians, while the demolition was pro¬ 
ceeding, that there was nothing which they 
would not do to pleasure them. Such were the 
additions made to the resolution of Histiaeus; 
and then Histiaeus himself stood forth and 
made answer to the Scyths in the name of all 
the Greeks:—“Good is the advice which ye 
have brought us, Scythians, and well have ye 
done to come here with such speed. Your ef¬ 
forts have now put us into the right path; and 
our efforts shall not be wanting to advance 
your cause. Your own eyes see that we are en¬ 


[ Book iv 

gaged in breaking the bridge; and, believe us, 
we will work zealously to procure our own 
freedom. Meantime, while we labour here at 
our task, be it your business to seek them out, 
and, when found, for our sakes, as well as your 
own, to visit them with the vengeance which 
they so well deserve.” 

140. Again the Scyths put faith in the prom¬ 
ises of the Ionian chiefs, and retraced their 
steps, hoping to fall in with the Persians. They 
missed, however, the enemy’s whole line of 
march; their own former acts being to blame 
for it. Had they not ravaged all the pasturages 
of that region, and filled in all the wells, they 
would have easily found the Persians when¬ 
ever they chose. But, as it turned out, the 
measures which seemed to them so wisely 
planned were exactly what caused their failure. 
They took a route where water was to be found 
and fodder could be got for their horses, and 
on this track sought their adversaries, expect¬ 
ing that they too would retreat through regions 
where these things were to be obtained. The 
Persians, however, kept strictly to the line of 
their former march, never for a moment de¬ 
parting from it; and even so gained the bridge 
with difficulty. It was night when they arrived, 
and their terror, when they found the bridge 
broken up, was great; for they thought that 
perhaps the lonians had deserted them. 

141. Now there was in the army of Darius a 
certain man, an Egyptian, who had a louder 
voice than any other man in the world. This 
person was bid by Darius to stand at the water’s 
edge, and call Histiaeus the Milesian. The fel¬ 
low did as he was bid; and Histiaeus, hearing 
him at the very first summons, brought the 
fleet to assist in conveying the army across, and 
once more made good the bridge. 

142. By these means the Persians escaped 
from Scythia, while the Scyths sought for them 
in vain, again missing their track. And hence 
the Scythians are accustomed to say of the 
lonians, by way of reproach, that, if they be 
looked upon as freemen, they are the basest 
and most dastardly of all mankind—but if they 
be considered as under servitude, they are the 
faithfullest of slaves, and the most fondly at¬ 
tached to their lords. 

143. Darius, having passed through Thrace, 
reached Sestos in the Chersonese, whence he 
crossed by the help of his fleet into Asia, leav¬ 
ing a Persian, named Megabazus, commander 
on the European side. This was the man on 
whom Darius once conferred special honour 
by a compliment which he paid him before all 


HERODOTUS 






i37'M^I the history 149 


the Persians. He was about to eat some pome¬ 
granates, and had opened the first, when his 
brother Artabanus asked him “what he would 
like to have in as great plenty as the seeds of 
the pomegranate.?” Darius answered—“Had I 
as many men like Megabazus as there are seeds 
here, it would please me better than to be lord 
of Greece.” Such was the compliment where¬ 
with Darius honoured the general to whom at 
this time he gave the command of the troops 
left in Europe, amounting in all to some eighty 
thousand men. 

144. This same Megabazus got himself an 
undying remembrance among the Hellespon- 
tians, by a certain speech which he made. It 
came to his knowledge, while he was staying 
at Byzantium, that the Chalcedonians made 
their settlement seventeen years earlier than 
the Byzantines. “Then,” said he, “the Chalce¬ 
donians must at that time have been labour¬ 
ing under blindness—otherwise, when so far 
more excellent a site was open to them, they 
would never have chosen one so greatly in¬ 
ferior.” Megabazus now, having been ap¬ 
pointed to take the command upon the Hel¬ 
lespont, employed himself in the reduction of 
all those states which had not of their own ac¬ 
cord joined the Medes. 

145. About this very time another great ex¬ 
pedition was undertaken against Libya, on a 
pretext which I will relate when I have prem¬ 
ised certain particulars. The descendants of the 
Argonauts in the third generation, driven out 
of Lemnos by the Pelasgi who carried off the 
Athenian women from Brauron, took ship and 
went to Lacedaemon, where, seating themselves 
on Mount Taygetum, they proceeded to kindle 
their fires. The Lacedaemonians, seeing this, 
sent a herald to inquire of them “who they 
were, and from what region they had come”; 
whereupon they made answer, “that they were 
Minyae, sons of the heroes by whom the ship 
Argo was manned; for these persons had 
stayed awhile in Lemnos, and had there be¬ 
come their progenitors.” On hearing this ac¬ 
count of their descent, the Lacedaemonians 
sent to them a second time, and asked “what 
was their object in coming to Lacedaemon, and 
there kindling their fires.?” They answered, 
“that, driven from their own land by the Pe¬ 
lasgi, they had come, as was most reasonable, 
to their fathers; and their wish was to dwell 
with them in their country, partake their priv¬ 
ileges, and obtain allotments of land. It seemed 
good to the Lacedaemonians to receive the Min¬ 
yae among them on their own terms; to assign 


them lands, and enrol them in their tribes. 
What chiefly moved them to this was the con¬ 
sideration that the sons of Tyndarus had sailed 
on board the Argo. The Minyae, on their part, 
forthwith married Spartan wives, and gave the 
wives, whom they had married in Lemnos, to 
Spartan husbands. 

146. However, before much time had 
elapsed, the Minyae began to wax wanton, de¬ 
manded to share the throne, and committed 
other impieties: whereupon the Lacedaemoni¬ 
ans passed on them sentence of death, and, 
seizing them, cast them into prison. Now the 
Lacedaemonians never put criminals to death 
in the daytime, but always at night. When the 
Minyae, accordingly, were about to suffer, their 
wives, who were not only citizens, but daugh¬ 
ters of the chief men among the Spartans, en¬ 
treated to be allowed to enter the prison, and 
have some talk with their lords; and the Spar¬ 
tans, not expecting any fraud from such a 
quarter, granted their request. The women en¬ 
tered the prison, gave their own clothes to their 
husbands, and received theirs in exchange: af¬ 
ter which the Minyae, dressed in their wives’ 
garments, and thus passing for women, went 
forth. Having effected their escape in this man¬ 
ner, they seated themselves once more upon 
Taygetum. 

147. It happened that at this very time Ther- 
as, son of Autesion (whose father Tisamenus 
was the son of Thersander, and grandson of 
Polynices), was about to lead out a colony from 
Lacedaemon. This Theras, by birth a Cadmei- 
an, was uncle on the mother’s side to the two 
sons of Aristodemus, Procles and Eurysthenes, 
and, during their infancy, administered in 
their right the royal power. When his neph¬ 
ews, however, on attaining to man’s estate, 
took the government, Theras, who could not 
bear to be under the authority of others after 
he had wielded authority so long himself, re¬ 
solved to leave Sparta and cross the sea to join 
his kindred. There were in the island now 
called Thera, but at that time Calliste, certain 
descendants of Membliarus, the son of Pceciles, 
a Phcenician. (For Cadmus, the son of Agenor, 
when he was sailing in search of Europe, made 
a landing on this island; and, either because the 
country pleased him, or because he had a pur¬ 
pose in so doing, left there a number of Phoe¬ 
nicians, and with them his own kinsman Mem¬ 
bliarus. Calliste had been inhabited by this 
race for eight generations of men, l-)efore the 
arrival of Theras from Laced^Tmon.) 

148. Theras now, having with him a certain 



HERODOTUS 


150 

number of men from each of the tribes, was 
setting forth on his expedition hitherward. Far 
from intending to drive out the former inhabi¬ 
tants, he regarded them as his near kin, and 
meant to settle among them. It happened that 
just at this time the Minyae, having escaped 
from their prison, had taken up their station 
upon Mount Taygetum; and the Lacedaemoni¬ 
ans, wishing to destroy them, were considering 
what was best to be done, when Theras begged 
their lives, undertaking to remove them from 
the territory. His prayer being granted, he took 
ship, and sailed, with three triaconters, to 
join the descendants of Membliarus. He was 
not, however, accompanied by all the Minyae, 
but only by some few of them. The greater 
number fled to the land of the Paroreats and 
Caucons, whom they drove out, themselves oc¬ 
cupying the region in six bodies, by which 
were afterwards built the towns of Lepreum, 
Macistus, Phryxae, Pyrgus, Epium, and Nudi- 
um; whereof the greater part were in my day 
demolished by the Eleans. 

149. The island was called Thera after the 
name of its founder. This same Theras had a 
son, who refused to cross the sea with him; 
Theras therefore left him behind, “a sheep,” 
as he said, “among wolves.” From this speech 
his son came to be called CEolycus, a name 
which afterwards grew to be the only one by 
which he was known. This CEolycus was the 
father of ^Egeus, from whom sprang the ^E- 
gidae, a great tribe in Sparta. The men of this 
tribe lost at one time all their children, where¬ 
upon they were bidden by an oracle to build a 
temple to the furies of Laius and CEdipus; they 
complied, and the mortality ceased. The same 
thing happened in Thera to the descendants of 
these men. 

150. Thus far the history is delivered with¬ 
out variation both by the Theraeans and the 
Lacedaemonians; but from this point we have 
only the Theraean narrative. Grinus (they 
say), the son of ^Esanius, a descendant of Ther¬ 
as, and king of the island of Thera, went to 
Delphi to offer a hecatomb on behalf of his na¬ 
tive city. He was accompanied by a large num¬ 
ber of the citizens, and among the rest by Bat- 
tus, the son of Polymnestus, who belonged to 
the Minyan family of the Euphemidae. On 
Grinus consulting the oracle about sundry mat¬ 
ters, the Pythoness gave him for answer, “that 
he should found a city in Libya.” Grinus re¬ 
plied to this: “I, O king! am too far advanced 
in years, and too inactive, for such a work. Bid 
one of these youngsters undertake it.” As he 


[ Book iv 

spoke, he pointed towards Battus; and thus the 
matter rested for that time. When the embassy 
returned to Thera, small account was taken of } 
the oracle by the Theraeans, as they were quite ' 
ignorant where Libya was, and were not so 
venturesome as to send out a colony in the 
dark. ' 

151. Seven years passed from the utterance i 

of the oracle, and not a drop of rain fell in j 

Thera: all the trees in the island, except one, j 

were killed with the drought. The Theraeans ' 
upon this sent to Delphi, and were reminded 1 
reproachfully that they had never colonised ' 
Libya. So, as there was no help for it, they sent j 
messengers to Crete, to inquire whether any of 1' 
the Cretans, or of the strangers sojourning ^ 
among them, had ever travelled as far as Libya: 
and these messengers of theirs, in their wander¬ 
ings about the island, among other places vis¬ 
ited Itanus, where they fell in with a man, 
whose name was Corobius, a dealer in purple. | 
In answer to their inquiries, he told them that | 
contrary winds had once carried him to Libya, j 
where he had gone ashore on a certain island | 
which was named Platea. So they hired this jj 

man’s services, and took him back with them ij 

to Thera. A few persons then sailed from 
Thera to reconnoitre. Guided by Corobius to j! 
the island of Platea, they left him there with I 
provisions for a certain number of months, and |l 
returned home with all speed to give their • 
countrymen an account of the island. | 

152. During their absence, which was pro¬ 
longed beyond the time that had been agreed 1 
upon, Corobius’ provisions failed him. He was 1 
relieved, however, after a while by a Samian 
vessel, under the command of a man named 1 
Colaeus, which, on its way to Egypt, was forced ' 
to put in at Platea. The crew, informed by 
Corobius of all the circumstances, left him suf¬ 
ficient food for a year. They themselves quit- | 
ted the island; and, anxious to reach Egypt, 
made sail in that direction, but were carried 
out of their course by a gale of wind from the . 
east. The storm not abating, they were driven 
past the Pillars of Hercules, and at last, by some 
special guiding providence, reached Tartessus. 
This trading town was in those days a virgin 
port, unfrequented by the merchants. The 
Samians, in consequence, made by the return 
voyage a profit greater than any Greeks before 
their day, excepting Sostratus, son of Laodam- 
as, an Eginetan, with whom no one else can 
compare. From the tenth part of their gains, 
amounting to six talents, the Samians made a 
brazen vessel, in shape like an Argive wine- 








i49'I56] the history 151 


bowl, adorned with the heads of griffins stand¬ 
ing out in high relief. This bowl, supported by 
three kneeling colossal figures in bronze, of 
the height of seven cubits, was placed as an 
oflering in the temple of Juno at Samos. The 
aid given to Corobius was the original cause of 
that close friendship which afterwards united 
the CyreniEans and Theraeans with the Sami¬ 
ans. 

153. The Theraeans who had left Corobius 
at Platea, when they reached Thera, told their 
countrymen that they had colonised an island 
on the coast of Libya. They of Thera, upon this, 
resolved that men should be sent to join the 
colony from each of their seven districts, and 
that the brothers in every family should draw 
lots to determine who were to go. Battus was 
chosen to be king and leader of the colony. So 
these men departed for Platea on board of two 
penteconters. 

154. Such is the account which the Therae¬ 
ans give. In the sequel of the history their ac¬ 
counts tally with those of the people of Gy¬ 
rene; but in what they relate of Battus these 
two nations difler most widely. The following 
is the Cyrenaic story. There was once a king 
named Etearchus, who ruled over Axus, a 
city in Crete, and had a daughter named 
Phronima. This girl’s mother having died, 
Etearchus married a second wife; who no soon¬ 
er took up her abode in his house than she 
proved a true step-mother to poor Phronima, 
always vexing her, and contriving against her 
every sort of mischief. At last she taxed her 
with light conduct; and Etearchus, persuaded 
by his wife that the charge was true, bethought 
himself of a most barbarous mode of punish¬ 
ment. There was a certain Thera^an, named 
Themison, a merchant, living at Axus. This 
man Etearchus invited to be his friend and 
guest, and then induced him to swear that he 
would do him any service he might require. 
No sooner had he given the promise, than the 
king fetched Phronima, and, delivering her 
into his hands, told him to carry her away and 
throw her into the sea. Hereupon Themison, 
full of indignation at the fraud whereby his 
oath had been procured, dissolved forthwith 
the friendship, and, taking the girl with him, 
sailed away from Crete. Having reached the 
open main, to acquit himself of the obligation 
under which he was laid by his oath to Etear¬ 
chus, he fastened ropes about the damsel, and, 
letting her down into the sea, drew her up 
again, and so made sail for Thera. 

155. At Thera, Polymnestus, one of the 


chief citizens of the place, took Phronima to be 
his concubine. The fruit of this union was a 
son, who stammered and had a lisp in his 
speech. According to the Cyrenaeans and Ther¬ 
aeans, the name given to the boy was Battus: in 
my opinion, however, he was called at the first 
something else, and only got the name of Bat¬ 
tus after his arrival in Libya, assuming it either 
in consequence of the words addressed to him 
by the Delphian oracle, or on account of the 
office which he held. For, in the Libyan 
tongue, the word “Battus” means “a king.” 
And this, I think, was the reason why the Py¬ 
thoness addressed him as she did: she knew he 
was to be a king in Libya, and so she used the 
Libyan word in speaking to him. For after he 
had grown to man’s estate, he made a journey 
to Delphi, to consult the oracle about his voice; 
when, upon his putting his question, the Py¬ 
thoness thus replied to him:— 

Battus, thou earnest to as\ of thy voice; but Phoe¬ 
bus Apollo 

Bids thee establish a city in Libya, abounding in 
fleeces; 

which was as if she had said in her own tongue, 
“King, thou earnest to ask of thy voice.” Then 
he replied, “Mighty lord, I did indeed come 
hither to consult thee about my voice, but thou 
speakest to me of quite other matters, bidding 
me colonise Libya—an impossible thing! whit 
power have I.f^ what followers.?” Thus he 
spake, but he did not persuade the Pythoness 
to give him any other response; so, when he 
found that she persisted in her former answer, 
he left her speaking, and set out on his return 
to Thera. 

156. After a while, everything began to go 
wrong both with Battus and with the rest of 
the Therarans, whereupon these last, ignorant 
of the cause of their sufferings, sent to Delphi 
to inquire for what reason they were afflicted. 
The Pythoness in reply told them “that if they 
and Battus would make a settlement at Gy¬ 
rene in Libya, things would go better with 
them.” Upon this the Theraeans sent out Battus 
with two penteconters, and with these he pro¬ 
ceeded to Libya, but within a little time, not 
knowing what else to do, the men returned 
and arrived off Thera. The Theraeans, when 
they -saw the vessels approaching, received 
them with showers of missiles, would not al¬ 
low them to come near the shore, and ordered 
the men to sail back from whence they came. 
Thus compelled to return, they settled on an 
island near the Libyan coast, which (as I have 
already said) was called Platea. In size it is re- 


152 HERODOTUS [Book iv 


ported to have been about equal to the city of 
Cyrenc, as it now stands. 

157. In this place they continued two years, 
but at the end of that time, as their ill luck still 
followed them, they left the island to the care 
of one of their number, and went in a body to 
Delphi, where they made complaint at the 
shrine to the effect that, notwithstanding they 
had colonised Libya, they prospered as poorly 
as before. Hereon the Pythoness made them 
the following answer:— 

Knowcst thou better than 1 , fair Libya abounding 
in fleeces? 

Better the stranger than he who has trod it? Oh! 
clever Therceans! 

Battus and his friends, when they heard this, 
sailed back to Platea: it was plain the god 
would not hold them acquitted of the colony 
till they were absolutely in Libya. So, taking 
with them the man whom they had left upon 
the island, they made a settlement on the main¬ 
land directly opposite Platea, fixing themselves 
at a place called Aziris, which is closed in on 
both sides by the most beautiful hills, and on 
one side is washed by a river. 

158. Here they remained six years, at the 
end of which time the Libyans induced them 
to move, promising that they would lead them 
to a better situation. So the Greeks left Aziris 
and were conducted by the Libyans towards 
the west, their journey being so arranged, by 
the calculation of their guides, that they passed 
in the night the most beautiful district of that 
whole country, which is the region called Irasa. 
The Libyans brought them to a spring, which 
goes by the name of Apollo’s fountain, and told 
them—“Here, Grecians, is the proper place for 
you to settle; for here the sky leaks.” 

159. During the lifetime of Battus, the 
founder of the colony, who reigned forty years, 
and during that of his son Arcesilaiis, who 
reigned sixteen, the Cyrenaeans continued at 
the same level, neither more nor fewer in num¬ 
ber than they were at the first. But in the reign 
of the third king, Battus, surnamed the Hap¬ 
py, the advice of the Pythoness brought Greeks 
from every quarter into Libya, to join the set¬ 
tlement. The Cyrenaeans had offered to all 
comers a share in their lands; and the oracle 
had spoken as follows:— 

He that is backward to share in the pleasant Uby- 
an acres, 

Sooner or later, 1 warn him, will feel regret at his 
folly. 

Thus a great multitude were collected together 
to Gyrene, and the Libyans of the neighbour¬ 


hood found themselves stripped of large por¬ 
tions of their lands. So they, and their king 
Adicran, being robbed and insulted by the Cy- 
renaeans, sent messengers to Egypt, and put 
themselves under the rule of Apries, the Egyp¬ 
tian monarch; who, upon this, levied a vast 
army of Egyptians, and sent them against Cy- ; 
rene. The inhabitants of that place left their ' 
walls and marched out in force to the district [ 
of Irasa, where, near the spring called Theste, 
they engaged the Egyptian host, and defeated 1 
it. The Egyptians, who had never before made 
trial of the prowess of the Greeks, and so 
thought but meanly of them, were routed with 1; 
such slaughter that but a very few of them ever | 
got back home. For this reason, the subjects of 
Apries, who laid the blame of the defeat on 
him, revolted from his authority. 

160. This Battus left a son called Arcesilaiis, 
who, when he came to the throne, had dissen- J 
sions with his brothers, which ended in their 
quitting him and departing to another region 

of Libya, where, after consulting among them- ' 
selves, they founded the city, which is still L 
called by the name then given to it, Barca. At '| 
the same time they endeavoured to induce the | 
Libyans to revolt from Gyrene. Not long after¬ 
wards Arcesilaiis made an expedition against 1 
the Libyans who had received his brothers and | 
been prevailed upon to revolt; and they, fear¬ 
ing his power, fled to their countrymen who 
dwelt towards the east. Arcesilaiis pursued, 
and chased them to a place called Leucon, 
which is in Libya, where the Libyans resolved 
to risk a battle. Accordingly they engaged the I 
Gyrenaeans, and defeated them so entirely that 
as many as seven thousand of their heavy¬ 
armed were slain in the fight. Arcesilaiis, after 
this blow, fell sick, and, whilst he was under 
the influence of a draught which he had taken, . 
was strangled by Learchus, one of his brothers. 
This Learchus was afterwards entrapped by 
Eryxo, the widow of Arcesilaiis, and put to • 
death. j 

161. Battus, Arcesilaiis’ son, succeeded to \ 
the kingdom, a lame man, who limped in his 
walk. Their late calamities now induced the 
Gyrenseans to send to Delphi and inquire of I 
the god what form of government they had 
best set up to secure themselves prosperity. The 
Pythoness answered by recommending them to 
fetch an arbitrator from Mantinea in Arcadia. 
Accordingly they sent; and the Mantineans 
gave them a man named Demonax, a person of 
high repute among the citizens; who, on his 
arrival at Gyrene, having first made himself ac- ' 


1 







157 - 166 ] THE HISTORY 153 


quainted with all the circumstances, proceed¬ 
ed to enrol the people in three tribes. One he 
made to consist of the Theraeans and their vas¬ 
sals; another of the Peloponnesians and Cre¬ 
tans; and a third of the various islanders. Be¬ 
sides this, he deprived the king Battus of his 
former privileges, only reserving for him cer¬ 
tain sacred lands and offices; while, with re¬ 
spect to the powers which had hitherto been 
exercised by the king, he gave them all into 
the hands of the people. 

162. Thus matters rested during the lifetime 
of this Battus, but when his son Arcesilaiis 
came to the throne, great disturbance arose 
about the privileges. For Arcesilaiis, son of Bat' 
tus the lame and Pheretima, refused to submit 
to the arrangements of Demonax the Mantin- 
ean, and claimed all the powers of his fore¬ 
fathers. In the contention which followed Ar- 
cesilaiis was worsted, whereupon he fled to 
Samos, while his mother took refuge at Sala- 
mis in the island of Cyprus. Salamis was at that 
time ruled by Evelthon, the same who offered 
at Delphi the censer which is in the treasury of 
the Corinthians, a work deserving of admira¬ 
tion. Of him Pheretima made request that he 
would give her an army whereby she and her 
son might regain Cyrene. But Evelthon, pre¬ 
ferring to give her anything rather than an 
army, made her various presents. Pheretima 
accepted them all, saying, as she took them: 
“Good is this too, O king! but better were it 
to give me the army which I crave at thy 
hands.” Finding that she repeated these words 
each time that he presented her with a gift, 
Evelthon at last sent her a golden spindle and 
distaff, with the wool ready for spinning. 
Again she uttered the same speech as before, 
whereupon Evelthon rejoined—“These are the 
gifts I present to women, not armies.” 

163. At Samos, meanwhile, Arcesilaiis was 
collecting troops by the promise of granting 
them lands. Having in this way drawn togeth¬ 
er a vast host, he sent to Delphi to consult the 
oracle about his restoration. The answer of the 
Pythoness was this: “Loxias grants thy race to 
rule over Cyrene, till four kings Battus, four 
Arcesilaiis by name, have passed away. Beyond 
this term of eight generations of men, he 
warns you not to seek to extend your reign. 
Thou, for thy part, be gentle, when thou art 
restored. If thou findest the oven full of jars, 
bake not the jars; but be sure to speed them 
on their way. If, however, thou heatest the 
oven, then avoid the island—else thou wilt die 
thyself, and with thee the most beautiful bull.” 


164. So spake the Pythoness. Arcesilaiis 
upon this returned to Cyrene, taking with him 
the troops which he had raised in Samos. 
There he obtained possession of the supreme 
power; whereupon, forgetful of the oracle, he 
took proceedings against those who had driven 
him into banishment. Some of them fled from 
him and quitted the country for good; others 
fell into his hands and were sent to suffer 
death in Cyprus. These last happening on their 
passage to put in through stress of weather at 
Cnidus, the Cnidians rescued them, and sent 
them off to Thera. Another body found a ref¬ 
uge in the great tower of Aglomachus, a pri¬ 
vate edifice, and were there destroyed by Ar- 
cesilaiis, who heaped wood around the place, 
and burnt them to death. Aware, after the 
deed was done, that this was what the Pytho¬ 
ness meant when she warned him, if he found 
the jars in the oven, not to bake them, he with¬ 
drew himself of his own accord from the city 
of Cyrene, believing that to be the island of the 
oracle, and fearing to die as had been prophe¬ 
sied. Being married to a relation of his own, a 
daughter of Alazir, at that time king of the 
Barcaeans, he took up his abode with him. At 
Barca, however, certain of the citizens, togeth¬ 
er with a number of Cyrenaean exiles, recognis¬ 
ing him as he walked in the forum, killed him; 
they slew also at the same time Alazir, his 
father-in-law. So Arcesilaiis, wittingly or un¬ 
wittingly, disobeyed the oracle, and thereby 
fulfilled his destiny. 

165. Pheretima, the mother of Arcesilaiis, 
during the time that her son, after working his 
own ruin, dwelt at Barca, continued to enjoy 
all his privileges at Cyrene, managing the gov¬ 
ernment, and taking her seat at the council- 
board. No sooner, however, did she hear of the 
death of her son at Barca, than leaving Cyrene, 
she fled in haste to Egypt. Arcesilaiis had 
claims for service done to Cambyses, son of 
Cyrus; since it was by him that Cyrene was 
put under the Persian yoke, and a rate of 
tribute agreed upon. Pheretima therefore went 
straight to Egypt, and presenting herself as a 
suppliant before Aryandes, entreated him to 
avenge her wrongs. Her son, she said, had met 
his death on account of his being so well af¬ 
fected towards the Medes. 

166. Now Aryandes had been made gover¬ 
nor of Egypt by Cambyses. He it was who in 
after times was punished with death by Darius 
for seeking to rival him. Aware, by report and 
also by his own eyesight, that Darius wished 
to leave a memorial of himself, such as no king 



154 HERODOTUS Book iv 


had ever left before, Aryandes resolved to fol¬ 
low his example, and did so, till he got his re¬ 
ward. Darius had refined gold to the last per¬ 
fection of purity in order to have coins struck 
of it: Aryandes, in his Egyptian government, 
did the very same with silver, so that to this 
day there is no such pure silver anywhere as 
the Aryandic. Darius, when this came to his 
ears, brought another charge, a charge of re¬ 
bellion, against Aryandes, and put him to 
death. 

167. At the time of which we are speaking 
Aryandes, moved with compassion for Phere- 
tima, granted her all the forces which there 
were in Egypt, both land and sea. The com¬ 
mand of the army he gave to Amasis, a Mara- 
phian; while Badres, one of the tribe of the 
Pasargadae, was appointed to lead the fleet. Be¬ 
fore the expedition, however, left Egypt, he 
sent a herald to Barca to inquire who it was 
that had slain king Arcesilaiis. The Barcaeans 
replied “that they, one and all, acknowledged 
the deed—Arcesilaiis had done them many and 
great injuries.” After receiving this reply, Ary¬ 
andes gave the troops orders to march with 
Pheretima. Such was the cause which served 
as a pretext for this expedition: its real object 
was, I believe, the subjugation of Libya. For 
Libya is inhabited by many and various races, 
and of these but a very few were subjects of the 
Persian king, while by far the larger number 
held Darius in no manner of respect. 

168. The Libyans dwell in the order which 
I will now describe. Beginning on the side of 
Egypt, the first Libyans are the Adyrmachidae. 
These people have, in most points, the same 
customs as the Egyptians, but use the costume 
of the Libyans. Their women wear on each leg 
a ring made of bronze; they let their hair grow 
long, and when they catch any vermin on their 
persons, bite it and throw it away. In this they 
differ from all the other Libyans. They are also 
the only tribe with whom the custom obtains 
of bringing all women about to become brides 
before the king, that he may choose such as are 
agreeable to him. The Adyrmachidae extend 
from the borders of Egypt to the harbour called 
Port Plynus. 

169. Next to the Adyrmachidae are the Gilli- 
gammae, who inhabit the country westward as 
far as the island of Aphrodisias. Off this tract 
is the island of Platea, which the Cyrenaeans 
colonised. Here too, upon the mainland, are 
Port Menelaiis, and Aziris, where the Cyrenae- 
ans once lived. The Silphium begins to grow 
in this region, extending from the island of 


Platea on the one side to the mouth of the Syr- 
tis on the other. The customs of the Gilligam- 
mae are like those of the rest of their country¬ 
men. 

170. The Asbystae adjoin the Gilligammae 
upon the west. They inhabit the regions above 
Gyrene, but do not reach to the coast, which be¬ 
longs to the Cyrenaeans. Four-horse chariots 
are in more common use among them than 
among any other Libyans. In most of their cus¬ 
toms they ape the manners of the Cyrenaeans. 

171. Westward of the Asbystae dwell the 
Auschisae, who possess the country above Bar¬ 
ca, reaching, however, to the sea at the place 
called Euesperides. In the middle of their ter¬ 
ritory is the little tribe of the Cabalians, which 
touches the coast near Tauchira, a city of the 
Barcaeans. Their customs are like those of the 
Libyans above Gyrene. 

172. The Nasamonians, a numerous people, 
are the western neighbours of the Auschisae. In 
summer they leave their flocks and herds upon 
the sea-shore, and go up the country to a place 
called Augila, where they gather the dates 
from the palms, which in those parts grow 
thickly, and are of great size, all of them being 
of the fruit-bearing kind. They also chase the 
locusts, and, when caught, dry them in the sun. 
after which they grind them to powder, and, 
sprinkling this upon their milk, so drink it. 
Each man among them has several wives, in 
their intercourse with whom they resemble the 
Massagetae. The following are their customs in 
the swearing of oaths and the practice of aug¬ 
ury. The man, as he swears, lays his hand upon 
the tomb of some one considered to have been 
pre-eminently just and good, and so doing 
swears by his name. For divination they be¬ 
take themselves to the sepulchres of their own 
ancestors, and, after praying, lie down to sleep 
upon their graves; by the dreams which then 
come to them they guide their conduct. When 
they pledge their faith to one another, each 
gives the other to drink out of his hand; if 
there be no liquid to be had, they take up dust 
from the ground, and put their tongues to it. 

173. On the country of the Nasamonians 
borders that of the Psylli, who were swept 
away under the following circumstances. The 
south-wind had blown for a long time and 
dried up all the tanks in which their water was 
stored. Now the whole region within the Syr- 
tis is utterly devoid of springs. Accordingly the 
Psylli took counsel among themselves, and by 
common consent made war upon the south- 
wind—so at least the Libyans say, I do but re- 









167 - 180 ] THE HISTORY 155 


peat their words—they went forth and reached 
the desert; but there the south-wind rose and 
buried them under heaps of sand: whereupon, 
the Psylli being destroyed, their lands passed 
to the Nasamonians. 

174. Above the Nasamonians, towards the 
south, in the district where the wild beasts 
abound, dwell the Garamantians, who avoid 
all society or intercourse with their fellow- 
men, have no weapon of war, and do not know 
how to defend themselves. 

175. These border the Nasamonians on the 
south: westward along the sea-shore their 
neighbours are the Macae, who, by letting the 
locks about the crown of their head grow long, 
while they clip them close everywhere else, 
make their hair resemble a crest. In war these 
people use the skins of ostriches for shields. 
The river Cinyps rises among them from the 
height called “the Hill of the Graces,” and 
runs from thence through their country to the 
sea. The Hill of the Graces is thickly covered 
with wood, and is thus very unlike the rest of 
Libya, which is bare. It is distant two hundred 
furlongs from the sea. 

176. Adjoining the Macae are the Gindanes, 
whose women wear on their legs anklets of 
leather. Each lover that a woman has gives her 
one; and she who can show the most is the best 
esteemed, as she appears to have been loved by 
the greatest number of men. 

177. A promontory jutting out into the sea 
from the country of the Gindanes is inhabited 
by the Lotophagi, who live entirely on the 
fruit of the lotus-tree. The lotus fruit is about 
the size of the lentisk berry, and in sweetness 
resembles the date. The Lotophagi even suc¬ 
ceed in obtaining from it a sort of wine. 

178. The sea-coast beyond the Lotophagi is 
occupied by the Machlyans, who use the lotus 
to some extent, though not so much as the peo¬ 
ple of whom we last spoke. The Machlyans 
reach as far as the great river called the Triton, 
which empties itself into the great lake Tri- 
tonis. Here, in this lake, is an island called 
Phla, which it is said the Lacedaemonians were 
to have colonised, according to an oracle. 

179. The following is the story as it is com¬ 
monly told. When Jason had finished building 
the Argo at the foot of Mount Pelion, he took 
on board the usual hecatomb, and moreover a 
brazen tripod. Thus equipped, he set sail, in¬ 
tending to coast round the Peloponnese, and 
so to reach Delphi. The voyage was prosperous 
as far as Malea; but at that point a gale of wind 
from the north came on suddenly, and carried 


him out of his course to the coast of Libya; 
where, before he discovered the land, he got 
among the shallows of Lake Tritonis. As he 
was turning it in his mind how he should find 
his way out, Triton (they say) appeared to 
him, and offered to show him the channel, and 
secure him a safe retreat, if he would give him 
the tripod. Jason complying, was shown by 
Triton the passage through the shallows; after 
which the god took the tripod, and, carrying 
it to his own temple, seated himself upon it, 
and, filled with prophetic fury, delivered to 
Jason and his companions a long prediction. 
“When a descendant,” he said, “of one of the 
Argo’s crew should seize and carry off the 
brazen tripod, then by inevitable fate would a 
hundred Grecian cities be built around Lake 
Tritonis.” The Libyans of that region, when 
they heard the words of this prophecy, took 
away the tripod and hid it. 

180. The next tribe beyond the Machlyans 
is the tribe of the Auseans. Both these nations 
inhabit the borders of Lake Tritonis, being sep¬ 
arated from one another by the river Triton. 
Both also wear their hair long, but the Mach¬ 
lyans let it grow at the back of the head, while 
the Auseans have it long in front. The Ausean 
maidens keep year by year a feast in honour of 
Minerva, whereat their custom is to draw up 
in two bodies, and fight with stones and clubs. 
They say that these are rites which have come 
down to them from their fathers, and that they 
honour with them their native goddess, who is 
the same as the Minerva (Athene) of the Gre¬ 
cians. If any of the maidens die of the wounds 
they receive, the Auseans declare that such are 
false maidens. Before the fight is suffered to be¬ 
gin, they have another ceremony. One of the 
virgins, the loveliest of the number, is selected 
from the rest; a Corinthian helmet and a com¬ 
plete suit of Greek armour are publicly put 
upon her; and, thus adorned, she is made to 
mount into a chariot, and led around the whole 
lake in a procession. What arms they used for 
the adornment of their damsels before the 
Greeks came to live in their country, I cannot 
say. I imagine they dressed them in Egyptian 
armour, for I maintain that both the shield and 
the helmet came into Greece from Egypt. The 
Auseans declare that Minerva is the daughter 
of Neptune and the Lake Tritonis—they say 
she quarrelled with her father, and applied to 
Jupiter, who consented to let her be his child; 
and so she become his adopted daughter. 
These people do not marry or live in families, 
but dwell together like the gregarious Ixrasts. 



156 HERODOTUS [Book iv 


When their children are full-grown, they are 
brought before the assembly of the men, which 
IS held every third month, and assigned to 
those whom they most resemble. 

181. Such are the tribes of wandering Liby¬ 
ans dwelling upon the sea-coast. Above them 
inland is the wild-beast tract: and beyond that, a 
ridge of sand, reaching from Egyptian Thehes 
to the Pillars of Hercules. Throughout this 
ridge, at the distance of about ten days’ journey 
from one another, heaps of salt in large lumps 
lie upon hills. At the top of every hill there 
gushes forth from the middle of the salt a 
stream of water, which is both cold and sweet. 
Around dwell men who are the last inhabi¬ 
tants of Libya on the side of the desert, living, 
as they do, more inland than the wild-beast dis¬ 
trict. Of these nations the first is that of the 
Ammonians, who dwell at a distance of ten 
days’ journey from Thebes, and have a temple 
derived from that of the Theban Jupiter. For 
at Thebes likewise, as I mentioned above, the 
image of Jupiter has a face like that of a ram. 
The Ammonians have another spring besides 
that which rises from the salt. The water of 
this stream is lukewarm at early dawn; at the 
time when the market fills it is much cooler; 
by noon it has grown quite cold; at this time, 
therefore, they water their gardens. As the af¬ 
ternoon advances the coldness goes off, till, 
about sunset, the water is once more luke¬ 
warm; still the heat increases, and at midnight 
it boils furiously. After this time it again begins 
to cool, and grows less and less hot till morn¬ 
ing comes. This spring is called “the Fountain 
of the Sun.” 

182. Next to the Ammonians, at the dis¬ 
tance of ten days’ journey along the ridge of 
sand, there is a second salt-hill like the Am- 
monian, and a second spring. The country 
round is inhabited, and the place bears the 
name of Augila. Hither it is that the Nasa- 
monians come to gather in the dates. 

183. Ten days’ journey from Augila there 
is again a salt-hill and a spring; palms of the 
fruitful kind grow here abundantly, as they do 
also at the other salt-hills. This region is in¬ 
habited by a nation called the Garamantians, a 
very powerful people, who cover the salt with 
mould, and then sow their crops. From thence 
is the shortest road to the Lotophagi, a journey 
of thirty days. In the Garamantian country 
are found the oxen which, as they graze, walk 
backwards. This they do because their horns 
curve outwards in front of their heads, so that 
it is not possible for them when grazing to 


move forwards, since in that case their horns 
would become fixed in the ground. Only here¬ 
in do they differ from other oxen, and further 
in the thickness and hardness of their hides. 
The Garamantians have four-horse chariots, in 
which they chase the Troglodyte Ethiopians, 
who of all the nations whereof any account has 
reached our ears are by far the swiftest of foot. 
The Troglodytes feed on serpents, lizards, and | 
other similar reptiles. Their language is unlike I 
that of any other people; it sounds like the 
screeching of bats. 

184. At the distance of ten days’ journey 1 
from the Garamantians there is again another 
salt-hill and spring of water; around which 
dwell a people, called the Atarantians, who \ 
alone of all known nations are destitute of 
names. The title of Atarantians is borne by the 
whole race in common; but the men have no ^ 
particular names of their own. The Ataran- | 
tians, when the sun rises high in the heaven, , 
curse him, and load him with reproaches, be- j 
cause (they say) he burns and wastes both , 
their country and themselves. Once more at the 
distance of ten days’ journey there is a salt-hill, 

a spring, and an inhabited tract. Near the salt | 
is a mountain called Atlas, very taper and : 
round; so lofty, moreover, that the top (it is I 
said) cannot be seen, the clouds never quitting 
it either summer or winter. The natives call 
this mountain “the Pillar of Heaven”; and they 
themselves take their name from it, being ' 1 
called Atlantes. They are reported not to eat any i 
living thing, and never to have any dreams. 

185. As far as the Atlantes the names of I 

the nations inhabiting the sandy ridge are ' 
known to me; but beyond them my knowledge | 
fails. The ridge itself extends as far as the Pil¬ 
lars of Hercules, and even further than these; 
and throughout the whole distance, at the end 
of every ten days’ journey, there is a salt-mine, 
with people dwelling round it who all of them 
build their houses with blocks of the salt. No 
rain falls in these parts of Libya; if it were oth¬ 
erwise, the walls of these houses could not ! 
stand. The salt quarried is of two colours, 
white and purple. Beyond the ridge, south¬ 
wards, in the direction of the interior, the 
country is a desert, with no springs, no beasts, i 
no rain, no wood, and altogether destitute of 
moisture. | 

186. Thus from Egypt as far as Lake Tri- j 
tonis Libya is inhabited by wandering tribes, 
whose drink is milk and their food the flesh of 
animals. Cow’s flesh, however, none of these 
tribes ever taste, but abstain from it for the 









181 - 192 ] the history 157 


same reason as the Egyptians, neither do they 
any of them breed swine. Even at Gyrene, the 
women think it wrong to eat the flesh of the 
cow, honouring in this Isis, the Egyptian god¬ 
dess, whom they worship both with fasts and 
festivals. The Barcaean women abstain, not from 
cow’s flesh only, but also from the flesh of swine. 

187. West of Lake Tritonis the Libyans are 
no longer wanderers, nor do they practise the 
same customs as the wandering people, or treat 
their children in the same way. For the wan¬ 
dering Libyans, many of them at any rate, if 
not all—concerning which I cannot speak with 
certainty—when their children come to the 
age of four years, burn the veins at the top of 
their heads with a flock from the fleece of a 
sheep: others burn the veins about the temples. 
This they do to prevent them from being 
plagued in their after lives by a flow of rheum 
from the head; and such they declare is the 
reason why they are so much more healthy 
than other men. Certainly the Libyans are the 
healthiest men that I know; but whether this is 
what makes them so, or not, I cannot positive¬ 
ly say—the healthiest certainly they are. If 
when the children are being burnt convulsions 
come on, there is a remedy of which they have 
made discovery. It is to sprinkle goat’s water 
upon the child, who thus treated, is sure to re¬ 
cover. In all this I only repeat what is said by 
the Libyans. 

188. The rites which the wandering Liby¬ 
ans use in sacrificing are the following. They 
begin with the ear of the victim, which they 
cut off and throw over their house: this done, 
they kill the animal by twisting the neck. They 
sacrifice to the Sun and Moon, but not to any 
other god. This worship is common to all the 
Libyans. The inhabitants of the parts about 
Lake Tritonis worship in addition Triton, 
Neptune, and Minerva, the last especially. 

189. The dress wherewith Minerva’s stat¬ 
ues are adorned, and her ^Egis, were derived 
by the Greeks from the women of Libya. For, 
except that the garments of the Libyan women 
are of leather, and their fringes made of leath¬ 
ern thongs instead of serpents, in all else the 
dress of both is exactly alike. The name too it¬ 
self shows that the mode of dressing the Pallas- 
statues came from Libya. For the Libyan wom¬ 
en wear over their dress goat-skins stript of 
the hair, fringed at their edges, and coloured 
with vermilion; and from these goat-skins the 
Greeks get their word ^Egis (goat-harness). I 
think for my part that the loud cries uttered in 
our sacred rites came also from thence; for the 


Libyan women are greatly given to such cries 
and utter them very sweetly. Likewise the 
Greeks learnt from the Libyans to yoke four 
horses to a chariot. 

190. All the wandering tribes bury their 
dead according to the fashion of the Greeks, ex¬ 
cept the Nasamonians. They bury them sitting, 
and are right careful when the sick man is at 
the point of giving up the ghost, to make him 
sit and not let him die lying down. The dwell¬ 
ings of these people are made of the stems of 
the asphodel, and of rushes wattled together. 
They can be carried from place to place. Such 
are the customs of the afore-mentioned tribes. 

191. Westward of the river Triton and ad¬ 
joining upon the Auseans, are other Libyans 
who till the ground, and live in houses: these 
people are named the Maxyans. They let the 
hair grow long on the right side of their heads, 
and shave it close on the left; they besmear 
their bodies with red paint; and they say that 
they are descended from the men of Troy. 
Their country and the remainder of Libya to¬ 
wards the west is far fuller of wild beasts and 
of wood than the country of the wandering 
people. For the eastern side of Libya, where the 
wanderers dwell, is low and sandy, as far as 
the river Triton; but westward of that the 
land of the husbandmen is very hilly, and 
abounds with forests and wild beasts. For this 
is the tract in which the huge serpents are 
found, and the lions, the elephants, the bears, 
the aspicks, and the horned asses. Here too are 
the dog-faced creatures, and the creatures 
without heads, whom the Libyans declare to 
have their eyes in their breasts; and also the 
wild men, and wild women, and many other 
far less fabulous beasts. 

192. Among the wanderers are none of 
these, but quite other animals; as antelopes, 
gazelles, buffaloes, and asses, not of the horned 
sort, but of a kind which does not need to 
drink; also oryxes, whose horns are used for 
the curved sides of citherns, and whose size is 
about that of the ox; foxes, hyaenas, porcupines, 
wild rams, dictyes, jackals, panthers, boryes, 
land-crocodiles about three cubits in length, 
very like lizards, ostriches, and little snakes, 
each with a single horn. All these animals are 
found here, and likewise those belonging to 
other countries, except the stag and the wild- 
boar; but neither stag nor wild-boar are found 
in any part of Libya. There are, however, three 
sorts of mice in these parts; the first are called 
two-footed; the next, zegeries, which is a Lib¬ 
yan word meaning “hills”; and the third. 


158 HERODOTUS [Book iv 


urchins. Weasels also are found in the Silphi- 
um region, much like the Tartessian. So many, 
therefore, are the animals belonging to the 
land of the wandering Libyans, in so far at 
least as my researches have been able to reach. 

193. Next to the Maxyan Libyans are the 
Zavecians, whose wives drive their chariots to 
battle. 

194. On them border the Gyzantians; in 
whose country a vast deal of honey is made by 
bees; very much more, however, by the skill of 
men. The people all paint themselves red, and 
eat monkeys, whereof there is inexhaustible 
store in the hills. 

195. Of! their coast, as the Carthaginians re¬ 
port, lies an island, by name Cyraunis, the 
length of which is two hundred furlongs, its 
breadth not great, and which is soon reached 
from the mainland. Vines and olive trees cov¬ 
er the whole of it, and there is in the island a 
lake, from which the young maidens of the 
country draw up gold-dust, by dipping into the 
mud birds’ feathers smeared with pitch. If 
this be true, I know not; I but write what is 
said. It may be even so, however; since I myself 
have seen pitch drawn up out of the water from 
a lake in Zacynthus. At the place I speak of 
there are a number of lakes; but one is larger 
than the rest, being seventy feet every way, and 
two fathoms in depth. Here they let down a 
pole into the water, with a bunch of myrtle tied 
to one end, and when they raise it again, there 
is pitch sticking to the myrtle, which in smell 
is like to bitumen, but in all else is better than 
the pitch of Pieria. This they pour into a trench 
dug by the lake’s side; and when a good deal 
has thus been got together, they draw it off and 
put it up in jars. Whatever falls into the lake 
passes underground, and comes up in the sea, 
which is no less than four furlongs distant. So 
then what is said of the island off the Libyan 
coast is not without likelihood. 

196. The Carthaginians also relate the fol¬ 
lowing:—There is a country in Libya, and a 
nation, beyond the Pillars of Hercules, which 
they are. wont to visit, where they no sooner 
arrive but forthwith they unlade their wares, 
and, having disposed them after an orderly 
fashion along the beach, leave them, and, re¬ 
turning aboard their ships, raise a great smoke. 
The natives, when they see the smoke, come 
down to the shore, and, laying out to view so 
much gold as they think the worth of the 
wares, withdraw to a distance. The Carthagin¬ 
ians upon this come ashore and look. If they 
think the gold enough, they take it and go 


their way; but if it does not seem to them suffi¬ 
cient, they go aboard ship once more, and wait 
patiently. Then the others approach and add 
to their gold, till the Carthaginians are content. 
Neither party deals unfairly by the other: for 
they themselves never touch the gold till it 
comes up to the worth of their goods, nor do 
the natives ever carry off the goods till the gold 
is taken away. 

197. These be the Libyan tribes whereof I 
am able to give the names; and most of these 
cared little then, and indeed care little now, for 
the king of the Medes. One thing more also I 
can add concerning this region, namely, that, 
so far as our knowledge reaches, four nations, 
and no more, inhabit it; and two of these na¬ 
tions are indigenous, while two are not. The 
two indigenous are the Libyans and Ethiopi¬ 
ans, who dwell respectively in the north and 
the south of Libya. The Phoenicians and the 
Greek are in-comers. 

198. It seems to me that Libya is not to 
compare for goodness of soil with either Asia 
or Europe, except the Cinyps region, which is 
named after the river that waters it. This piece 
of land is equal to any country in the world for 
cereal crops, and is in nothing like the rest of 
Libya. For the soil here is black, and springs of 
water abound; so that there is nothing to fear 
from drought; nor do heavy rains (and it rains 
in that part of Libya) do any harm when they 
soak the ground. The returns of the harvest 
come up to the measure which prevails in Baby¬ 
lonia. The soil is likewise good in the country 
of the Euesperites; for there the land brings 
forth in the best years a hundred-fold. But the 
Cinyps region yields three hundred-fold. 

199. The country of the Cyrenaeans, which 
is the highest tract within the part of Libya in¬ 
habited by the wandering tribes, has three 
seasons that deserve remark. First the crops 
along the sea-coast begin to ripen, and are 
ready for the harvest and the vintage; after 
they have been gathered in, the crops of the 
middle tract above the coast region (the hill- 
country, as they call it) need harvesting; while 
about the time when this middle crop is 
housed, the fruits ripen and are fit for cutting 
in the highest tract of all. So that the produce 
of the first tract has been all eaten and drunk 
by the time that the last harvest comes in. And 
the harvest-time of the Cyrenaeans continues 
thus for eight full months. So much concern¬ 
ing these matters. 

200. When the Persians sent from Egypt by 
Aryandes to help Pheretima reached Barca, 







193 - 205 J THE HISTORY 159 


they laid siege to the town, calling on those 
within to give up the men who had been guilty 
of the murder of Arcesilaiis. The townspeople, 
however, as they had one and all taken part in 
the deed, refused to entertain the proposition. 
So the Persians beleaguered Barca for nine 
months, in the course of which they dug sev¬ 
eral mines from their own lines to the walls, 
and likewise made a number of vigorous as¬ 
saults. But their mines were discovered by a 
man who was a worker in brass, who went 
with a brazen shield all round the fortress, and 
laid it on the ground inside the city. In other 
places the shield, when he laid it down, was 
quite dumb; but where the ground was under¬ 
mined, there the brass of the shield rang. Here, 
therefore, the Barcaeans countermined, and 
slew the Persian diggers. Such was the way in 
which the mines were discovered; as for the 
assaults, the Barcaeans beat them back. 

201. When much time had been consumed, 
and great numbers had fallen on both sides, 
nor had the Persians lost fewer than their ad¬ 
versaries, Amasis, the leader of the land-army, 
perceiving that, although the Barcaeans would 
never be conquered by force, they might be 
overcome by fraud, contrived as follows. One 
night he dug a wide trench, and laid light 
planks of wood across the opening, after which 
he brought mould and placed it upon the 
planks, taking care to make the place level 
with the surrounding ground. At dawn of day 
he summoned the Barcaeans to a parley: and 
they gladly hearkening, the terms were at 
length agreed upon. Oaths were interchanged 
upon the ground over the hidden trench, and 
the agreement ran thus—“So long as the 
ground beneath our feet stands firm, the oath 
shall abide unchanged; the people of Barca 
agree to pay a fair sum to the king, and the 
Persians promise to cause no further trouble 
to the people of Barca.” After the oath, the 
Barcaeans, relying upon Its terms, threw open 
all their gates, went out themselves beyond the 
walls, and allowed as many of the enemy as 
chose to enter. Then the Persians broke down 
their secret bridge, and rushed at speed into 
the town—their reason for breaking the bridge 
being that so they might observe what they 
had sworn; for they had promised the Barcae- 
ans that the oath should continue “so long as 
the ground whereon they stood was firm.” 
When, therefore, the bridge was once broken 
down, the oath ceased to hold. 

202. Such of the Barcaeans as were most 
guilty the Persians gave up to Pheretima, who 


nailed them to crosses all round the walls of 
the city. She also cut off the breasts of their 
wives, and fastened them likewise about the 
walls. The remainder of the people she gave 
as booty to the Persians, except only the Bat- 
tiadae and those who had taken no part in 
the murder, to whom she handed over the 
possession of the town. 

203. The Persians now set out on their re¬ 
turn home, carrying with them the rest of the 
Barcaeans, whom they had made their slaves. 
On their way they came to Gyrene; and the 
Cyrenaeans, out of regard for an oracle, let 
them pass through the town. During the pass¬ 
age, Bares, the commander of the fleet, ad¬ 
vised to seize the place; but Amasis, the leader 
of the land-force, would not consent; “be¬ 
cause,” he said, “they had only been charged 
to attack the one Greek city of Barca.” When, 
however, they had passed through the town, 
and were encamped upon the hill of Lycaean 
Jove, it repented them that they had not seized 
Gyrene, and they endeavoured to enter it a 
second lime. The Gyrenaeans, however, would 
not suffer this; whereupon, though no one 
appeared to offer them battle, yet a panic 
came upon the Persians, and they ran a dis¬ 
tance of full sixty furlongs before they pitched 
their camp. Here as they lay, a messenger 
came to them from Aryandes, ordering them 
home. Then the Persians besought the men of 
Gyrene to give them provisions for the way. 
and, these consenting, they set off on their re¬ 
turn to Egypt. But the Libyans now beset them, 
and, for the sake of their clothes and harness, 
slew all who dropped behind and straggled, 
during the whole march homewards. 

204. The furthest point of Libya reached by 
this Persian host was the city of Euesperides. 
The Barcaeans carried into slavery were sent 
from Egypt to the king; and Darius assigned 
them a village in Bactria for their dwelling- 
place. To this village they gave the name of 
Barca, and it was to my time an inhabited 
place in Bactria. 

205. Nor did Pheretima herself end her 
days happily. For on her return to Egypt from 
Libya, directly after taking vengeance on the 
people of Barca, she was overtaken by a most 
horrid death. Her body swarmed with worms, 
which ate her flesh while she was still alive. 
Thus do men, by over-harsh punishments, 
draw down upon themselves the anger of the 
gods. Such then, and so fierce, was the ven¬ 
geance which Pheretima, daughter of Battus, 
took upon the Barcaeans. 
