The Fifth Book, Entitled 
TERPSICHORE 




I. The Persians left behind by King Darius in 
Europe, who had Megabazus for their general, 
reduced, before any other Hellespontine state, 
the people of Perinthus, who had no mind to 
become subjects of the king. Now the Perinth- 
ians had ere this been roughly handled by 
another nation, the Paonians. For the Paeoni- 
ans from about the Strymon were once bidden 
by an oracle to make war upon the Perinthians, 
and if these latter, when the camps faced one 
another, challenged them by name to fight, 
then to venture on a battle, but if otherwise, 
not to make the hazard. The Paeonians fol¬ 
lowed the advice. Now the men of Perinthus 
drew out to meet them in the skirts of their 
city; and a threefold single combat was fought 
on challenge given. Man to man, and horse to 
horse, and dog to dog, was the strife waged; 
and the Perinthians, winners of two combats 
out of the three, in their joy had raised the 
paean; when the Paeonians, struck by the 
thought that this was what the oracle had 
meant, passed the word one to another, say¬ 
ing, “Now of a surety has the oracle been ful¬ 
filled for us; now our work begins.” Then the 
Paeonians set upon the Perinthians in the midst 
of their paean, and defeated them utterly, leav¬ 
ing but few of them alive. 

2. Such was the affair of the Paeonians, 
which happened a long time previously. At 
this time the Perinthians, after a brave struggle 
for freedom, were overcome by numbers, and 
yielded to Megabazus and his Persians. After 
Perinthus had been brought under, Megabazus 
led his host through Thrace, subduing to the 
dominion of the king all the towns and all the 
nations of those parts. For the king’s com¬ 
mand to him was that he should conquer 
Thrace. 

3. The Thracians are the most powerful 
people in the world, except, of course, the In¬ 
dians; and if they had one head, or were 


agreed among themselves, it is my belief that 
their match could not be found anywhere, and 
that they would very far surpass all other na¬ 
tions. But such union is impossible for them, | 
and there are no means of ever bringing it , 
about. Herein therefore consists their weak¬ 
ness. The Thracians bear many names in the 
different regions of their country, but all of „ 
them have like usages in every respect, ex- I 
cepting only the Getae, the Trausi, and those 
who dwell above the people of Creston. » 

4. Now the manners and customs of the | 
Getae, who believe in their immortality, I have 1 
already spoken of. The Trausi in all else re¬ 
semble the other Thracians, but have customs 

at births and deaths which I will now describe. 1 
When a child is born all its kindred sit round 
about it in a circle and weep for the woes it ‘ 
will have to undergo now that it is come into ; 
the world, making mention of every ill that 
falls to the lot of humankind; when, on the 
other hand, a man has died, they bury him | 
with laughter and rejoicings, and say that now 1 
he is free from a host of sufferings, and enjoys 
the completest happiness. 

5. The Thracians who live above the Cre- 
stonaeans observe the following customs. Each 
man among them has several wives; and no 
sooner does a man die than a sharp contest en¬ 
sues among the wives upon the question 
which of them all the husband loved most 
tenderly; the friends of each eagerly plead on ‘ 
her behalf, and she to whom the honour is j 
adjudged, after receiving the praises both of 
men and women, is slain over the grave by the 
hand of her next of kin, and then buried with 
her husband. The others are sorely grieved, for 
nothing is considered such a disgrace. 

6. The Thracians who do not belong to 
these tribes have the customs which follow. 
They sell their children to traders. On their 
maidens they keep no watch, but leave them 




THE HISTORY 


altogether free, while on the conduct of their 
wives they keep a most strict watch. Brides are 
purchased of their parents for large sums of 
money. Tattooing among them marks noble 
birth, and the want of it low birth. To be idle 
is accounted the most honourable thing, and 
to be a tiller of the ground the most dishonour¬ 
able. To live by war and plunder is of all 
things the most glorious. These are the most 
remarkable of their customs. 

7. The gods which they worship are but 
three. Mars, Bacchus, and Dian. Their kings, 
however, unlike the rest of the citizens, wor¬ 
ship Mercury more than any other god, always 
swearing by his name, and declaring that they 
are themselves sprung from him. 

8. Their wealthy ones are buried in the fol¬ 
lowing fashion. The body is laid out for three 
days; and during this time they kill victims of 
all kinds, and feast upon them, after first be¬ 
wailing the departed. Then they either burn 
the body or else bury it in the ground. Lastly, 
they raise a mound over the grave, and hold 
games of all sorts, wherein the single combat is 
awarded the highest prize. Such is the mode of 
burial among the Thracians. 

9. As regards the region lying north of this 
country no one can say with any certainty what 
men inhabit it. It appears that you no sooner 
cross the Ister than you enter on an intermin¬ 
able wilderness. The only people of whom I 
can hear as dwelling beyond the Ister are the 
race named Sigynnae, who wear, they say, a 
dress like the Medes, and have horses which 
are covered entirely with a coat of shaggy 
hair, five fingers in length. They are a small 
breed, flat-nosed, and not strong enough to 
bear men on their backs; but when yoked to 
chariots, they are among the swiftest known, 
which is the reason why the people of that 
country use chariots. Their borders reach down 
almost to the Eneti upon the Adriatic Sea, and 
they call themselves colonists of the Medes; but 
how they can be colonists of the Medes I for 
my part cannot imagine. Still nothing is im¬ 
possible in the long lapse of ages. Sigynnae is 
the name which the Ligurians who dwell 
above Massilia give to traders, while among the 
Cyprians the word means spears. 

10. According to the account which the 
Thracians give, the country beyond the Ister is 
possessed by bees,^ on account of which it is 
impossible to penetrate farther. But in this they 
seem to me to say what has no likelihood; for 
it is certain that those creatures are very im- 

^ In reality, mosquitoes. 


161 

patient of cold. I rather believe that it is on 
account of the cold that the regions which lie 
under the Bear are without inhabitants. Such 
then are the accounts given of this country, the 
sea-coast whereof Megabazus was now em¬ 
ployed in subjecting to the Persians. 

11. King Darius had no sooner crossed the 
Hellespont and reached Sardis, than he be¬ 
thought himself of the good deed of Histiaeus 
the Milesian, and the good counsel of the Myti- 
lenean Coes. He therefore sent for both of 
them to Sardis, and bade them each crave a 
boon at his hands. Now Histiaeus, as he was 
already king of Miletus, did not make request 
for any government besides, but asked Darius 
to give him Myrcinus of the Edonians, where 
he wished to build him a city. Such was the 
choice that Histiaeus made. Coes, on the other 
hand, as he was a mere burgher, and not a 
king, requested the sovereignty of Mytilene. 
Both alike obtained their requests, and straight¬ 
way betook themselves to the places which 
they had chosen. 

12. It chanced in the meantime that King 
Darius saw a sight which determined him to 
bid Megabazus remove the Paeonians from 
their seats in Europe and transport them to 
Asia. There were two Paeonians, Pigres and 
Mantyes, whose ambition it was to obtain the 
sovereignty over their countrymen. As soon 
therefore as ever Darius crossed into Asia, 
these men came to Sardis, and brought with 
them their sister, who was a tall and beautiful 
woman. Having so done, they waited till a day 
came when the king sat in state in the suburb 
of the Lydians; and then dressing their sister 
in the richest gear they could, sent her to draw 
water for them. She bore a pitcher upon her 
head, and with one arm led a horse, while all 
the way as she went she span flax. Now as she 
passed by where the king was, Darius took 
notice of her; for it was neither like the Per¬ 
sians nor the Lydians, nor any of the dwellers 
in Asia, to do as she did. Darius accordingly 
noted her, and ordered some of his guard to 
follow her steps, and watch to see what she 
would do with the horse. So the spearmen 
went; and the woman, when she came to the 
river, first watered the horse, and then filling 
the pitcher, came back the same way she had 
gone, with the pitcher of water upon her head, 
and the horse dragging upon her arm, while 
she still kept twirling the spindle. 

13. King Darius was full of wonder both at 
what they who had watched the woman told 
him, and at what he had himself seen. So he 



162 HERODOTUS FBookv 


commanded that she should be brought before 
him. And the woman came; and with her ap¬ 
peared her brothers, who had been watching 
everything a little way off. Then Darius asked 
them of what nation the woman was; and the 
young men replied that they were Paeonians, 
and she was their sister. Darius rejoined by 
asking, “Who the Piconians were, and in what 
part of the world they lived and, further, 
what business had brought the young men to 
Sardis.^” Then the brothers told him they had 
come to put themselves under his power, and 
Paconia was a country upon the river Strymon, 
and the Strymon was at no great distance from 
the Hellespont. The Pa'onians, they said, were 
colonists of the Teucrians from Troy. When 
they had thus answered his questions, Darius 
asked if all the women of their country worked 
so hard.^ Then the brothers eagerly answered. 
Yes; for this was the very object with which 
the whole thing had been done. 

14. So Darius wrote letters to Megabazus, 
the commander whom he had left behind in 
Thrace, and ordered him to remove the Paeoni- 
ans from their own land, and bring them into 
his presence, men, women, and children. And 
straightway a horseman took the message, and 
rode at speed to the Hellespont; and, crossing 
it, gave the paper to Megabazus. Then Mega¬ 
bazus, as soon as he had read it, and procured 
guides from Thrace, made war upon Paeonia. 

15. Now when the Paeonians heard that the 
Persians were marching against them, they gath¬ 
ered themselves together, and marched down 
to the sea-coast, since they thought the Persians 
would endeavour to enter their country on that 
side. Here then they stood in readiness to op¬ 
pose the army of Megabazus. But the Persians, 
who knew that they had collected, and were 
gone to keep guard at the pass near the sea, got 
guides, and taking the inland route before the 
Paeonians were aware, poured down upon 
their cities, from which the men had all 
marched out; and finding them empty, easily 
got possession of them. Then the men, when 
they heard that all their towns were taken, 
scattered this way and that to their homes, and 
gave themselves up to the Persians. And so 
these tribes of the Paeonians, to wit, the Siropae- 
onians, the Paeoplians, and all the others as far 
as Lake Prasias, were torn from their seats and 
led away into Asia. 

16. They on the other hand who dwelt 
about Mount Pangaeum and in the country of 
the Doberes, the Agrianians, and the Odoman- 
tians, and they likewise who inhabited Lake 


Prasias, were not conquered by Megabazus. ‘ 
He sought indeed to subdue the dwellers upon ! 
the lake, but could not effect his purpose. I 
Their manner of living is the following. Plat- j 
forms supported upon tall piles stand in the 
middle of the lake, which are approached from 
the land by a single narrow bridge. At the first ! 
the piles which bear up the platforms were i 
fixed in their places by the whole body of the | 
citizens, but since that time the custom which ; 
has prevailed about fixing them is this:—they ! 
are brought from a hill called Orbelus, and | 
every man drives in three for each wife that he ! 
marries. Now the men have all many wives 
apiece; and this is the way in which they live. 
Each has his own hut, wherein he dwells, upon 
one of the platforms, and each has also a trap- | 
door giving access to the lake beneath; and ! 
their wont is to tie their baby children by the j 
foot with a string, to save them from rolling 1 ; 
into the water. They feed their horses and 1 
their other beasts upon fish, which abound in 
the lake to such a degree that a man has only . 
to open his trap-door and to let down a basket ji 
by a rope into the water, and then to wait a | 
very short time, when he draws it up quite ;■ 
full of them. The fish are of two kinds, which | 
they call the paprax and the tilon. | 

17. The Paeonians therefore^at least such 
of them as had been conquered—were led , 
away into Asia. As for Megabazus, he no soon¬ 
er brought the Paeonians under, than he sent 
into Macedonia an embassy of Persians, choos- ^ 
ing for the purpose the seven men of most note j 
in all the army after himself. These persons II 
were to go to Amyntas, and require him to 
give earth and water to King Darius. Now 
there is a very short cut from the Lake Prasias 
across to Macedonia. Quite close to the lake is 
the mine which yielded afterwards a talent of 
silver a day to Alexander; and from this mine 
you have only to cross the mountain called 
Dysorum to find yourself in the Macedonian 
territory. 

18. So the Persians sent upon this errand, I 
when they reached the court, and v/ere 
brought into the presence of Amyntas, re¬ 
quired him to give earth and water to King ' 
Darius. And Amyntas not only gave them ' 
what they asked, but also invited them to 
come and feast with him; after which he made | 
ready the board with great magnificence, and I 
entertained the Persians in right friendly fash- 1 
ion. Now when the meal was over, and they 
were all set to the drinking, the Persians said— 

“Dear Macedonian, we Persians have a cus- 






14 - 22 ] THE HISTORY 163 


tom when we make a great feast to bring with 
us to the board our vvives and concubines, and 
make them sit beside us. Now then, as thou 
hast received us so kindly, and feasted us so 
handsomely, and givest moreover earth and 
water to King Darius, do also after our custom 
in this matter.” 

Then Amyntas answered—“O, Persians! we 
have no such custom as this; but with us men 
and women are kept apart. Nevertheless, since 
you, who are our lords, wish it, this also shall 
be granted to you.” 

When Amyntas had thus spoken, he bade 
some go and fetch the women. And the wom¬ 
en came at his call and took their seats in a 
row over against the Persians. Then, when the 
Persians saw that the women were fair and 
comely, they spoke again to Amyntas and said, 
that “what had been done was not wise; for it 
had been better for the women not to have 
come at all, than to come in this way, and not 
sit by their sides, but remain over against 
them, the torment of their eyes.” So Amyntas 
was forced to bid the women sit side by side 
with the Persians. The women did as he or¬ 
dered; and then the Persians, who had drunk 
more than they ought, began to put their hands 
on them, and one even tried to give the woman 
next him a kiss. 

19. King Amyntas saw, but he kept silence, 
although sorely grieved, for he greatly feared 
the power of the Persians. Alexander, however, 
Amyntas’ son, who was likewise there and 
witnessed the whole, being a young man and 
unacquainted with suffering, could not any 
longer restrain himself. He therefore, full of 
wrath, spake thus to Amyntas:—“Dear father, 
thou art old and shouldst spare thyself. Rise 
up from table and go take thy rest; do not stay 
out the drinking. I will remain with the guests 
and give them all that is fitting.” 

Amyntas, who guessed that Alexander would 
play some wild prank, made answer:—“Dear 
son, thy words sound to me as those of one who 
is well nigh on fire, and I perceive thou sendest 
me away that thou mayest do some wild deed. 
I beseech thee make no commotion about 
these men, lest thou bring us all to ruin, but 
bear to look calmly on what they do. For my¬ 
self, I will e’en withdraw as thou biddest me.” 

20. Amyntas, when he had thus besought 
his son, went out; and Alexander said to the 
Persians, “Look on these ladies as your own, 
dear strangers, all or any of them—only tell us 
your wishes. But now, as the evening wears, 
and I see you have all had wine enough, let 


them, if you please, retire, and when they have 
bathed they shall come back again.” To this 
the Persians agreed, and Alexander, having got 
the women away, sent them off to the harem, 
and made ready in their room an equal num¬ 
ber of beardless youths, whom he dressed in 
the garments of the women, and then, arming 
them with daggers, brought them in to the 
Persians, saying as he introduced them, “Me- 
thinks, dear Persians, that your entertainment 
has fallen short in nothing. We have set before 
you all that we had ourselves in store, and all 
that we could anywhere find to give you—and 
now, to crown the whole, we make over to 
you our sisters and our mothers, that you may 
perceive yourselves to be entirely honoured by 
us, even as you deserve to be—and also that 
you may take back word to the king who sent 
you here, that there was one man, a Greek, 
the satrap of Macedonia, by whom you were 
both feasted and lodged handsomely.” So 
speaking, Alexander set by the side of each 
Persian one of those whom he had called Mac¬ 
edonian women, but who were in truth men. 
And these men, when the Persians began to be 
rude, despatched them with their daggers. 

21. So the ambassadors perished by this 
death, both they and also their followers. For 
the Persians had brought a great train with 
them, carriages, and attendants, and baggage 
of every kind—all of which disappeared at the 
same time as the men themselves. Not very 
long afterwards the Persians made strict search 
for their lost embassy; but Alexander, with 
much wisdom, hushed up the business, brib¬ 
ing those sent on the errand, partly with 
money, and partly with the gift of his own 
sister Gygaea, whom he gave in marriage to 
Bubares, a Persian, the chief leader of the ex¬ 
pedition which came in search of the lost men. 
Thus the death of these Persians was hushed 
up, and no more was said of it. 

22. Now that the men of this family are 
Greeks, sprung from Perdiccas, as they them¬ 
selves affirm, is a thing which I can declare of 
my own knowledge, and which I will here¬ 
after make plainly evident. That they are so 
has been already adjudged by those who man¬ 
age the Pan-Hellenic contest at Olympia. For 
when Alexander wished to contend in the 
games, and had come to Olympia with no 
other view, the Greeks who were about to run 
against him would have excluded him from 
the contest—saying that Greeks only were al¬ 
lowed to contend, and not barbarians. But Al¬ 
exander proved himself to be an Argive, and 


164 HERODOTUS [Book v 


was distinctly adjudged a Greek; after which 
he entered the lists for the foot-race, and was 
drawn to run in the first pair. Thus was this 
matter settled. 

23. Megabazus, having reached the Helles¬ 
pont with the Baconians, crossed it, and went up 
to Sardis. He had become aware while in Eu¬ 
rope that Histiaeus the Milesian was raising a 
wall at Myrcinus—the town upon the Strymon 
which he had obtained from King Darius as 
his guerdon for keeping the bridge. No sooner 
therefore did he reach Sardis with the Baconi¬ 
ans than he said to Darius, “What mad thing 
is this that thou hast done, sire, to let a Greek, 
a wise man and a shrewd, get hold of a town 
in Thrace, a place too where there is abun¬ 
dance of timber fit for shipbuilding, and oars 
in plenty, and mines of silver, and about which 
are many dwellers both Greek and barbarian, 
ready enough to take him for their chief, and 
by day and night to do his bidding! I pray thee 
make this man cease his work, if thou 
wouldest not be entangled in a war with thine 
own followers. Stop him, but with a gentle 
message, only bidding him to come to thee. 
Then when thou once hast him in thy power, 
be sure thou take good care that he never get 
back to Greece again.” 

24. With these words Megabazus easily per¬ 
suaded Darius, who thought he had shown 
true foresight in this matter. Darius therefore 
sent a messenger to Myrcinus, who said, 
“These be the words of the king to thee, O His- 
tiacus! I have looked to find a man well aflec- 
tioned towards me and towards my greatness; 
and I have found none whom I can trust like 
thee. Thy deeds, and not thy words only, have 
proved thy love for me. Now then, since I have 
a mighty enterprise in hand, I pray thee come 
to me, that I may show thee what I purpose!” 

Histiaeus, when he heard this, put faith in 
the words of the messenger; and, as it seemed 
to him a grand thing to be the king’s counsel¬ 
lor, he straightway went up to Sardis. Then 
Darius, when he was come, said to him, “Dear 
Histiseus, hear why I have sent for thee. No 
sooner did I return from Scythia, and lose thee 
out of my sight, than I longed, as I have never 
longed for aught else, to behold thee once 
more, and to interchange speech with thee. 
Right sure I am there is nothing in all the 
world so precious as a friend who is at once 
wise and true: both which thou art, as I have 
had good proof in what thou hast already done 
for me. Now then ’tis well thou art come; for 
look, I have an ofier to make to thee. Let go 


Miletus and thy newly-founded town in 
Thrace, and come with me up to Susa; share 
all that I have; live with me, and be my coun¬ 
sellor. 

25. When Darius had thus spoken he made 
Artaphernes, his brother by the father’s side, 
governor of Sardis, and taking Histiaeus with 
him, went up to Susa. He left as general of all 
the troops upon the sea-coast Otanes, son of 
Sisamnes, whose father King Cambyses slew 
and flayed, because that he, being of the num¬ 
ber of the royal judges, had taken money to 
give an unrighteous sentence. Therefore Cam¬ 
byses slew and flayed Sisamnes, and cutting his 
skin into strips, stretched them across the seat 
of the throne whereon he had been wont to sit 
when he heard causes. Having so done Cam¬ 
byses appointed the son of Sisamnes to be 
judge in his father’s room, and bade him never 
forget in what way his seat was cushioned. 

26. Accordingly this Otanes, who had oc¬ 
cupied so strange a throne, became the succes¬ 
sor of Megabazus in his command, and took 
first of all Byzantium and Chalcedon, then 
Antandrus in the Troas, and next Lamponi- 
um. This done, he borrowed ships of the Les¬ 
bians, and took Lemnos and Imbrus, which 
were still inhabited by Belasgians. 

27. Now the Lemnians stood on their de¬ 
fence, and fought gallantly; but they were 
brought low in course of time. Such as out¬ 
lived the struggle were placed by the Bersians 
under the government of Lycaretus, the broth¬ 
er of that Maeandrius who was tyrant of Samos. 
(This Lycaretus died afterwards in his govern¬ 
ment.) The cause which Otanes alleged for 
conquering and enslaving all these nations 
was that some had refused to join the king’s 
army against Scythia, while others had mo¬ 
lested the host on its return. Such were the ex¬ 
ploits which Otanes performed in his com¬ 
mand. 

28. Afterwards, but for no long time, there 
was a respite from suffering. Then from Na- 
zos and Miletus troubles gathered anew about 
Ionia. Now Naxos at this time surpassed all 
the other islands in prosperity, and Miletus 
had reached the height of her power, and was 
the glory of Ionia. But previously for two gen¬ 
erations the Milesians had suffered grievously 
from civil disorders, which were composed by 
the Barians, whom the Milesians chose before 
all the rest of the Greeks to rearrange their 
government. 

29. Now the way in which the Barians 
healed their differences was the following. A 









23 - 32 ] THE HISTORY 165 


number of the chief Parians came to Miletus, 
and when they saw in how ruined a condition 
the Milesians were, they said that they would 
like first to go over their country. So they went 
through all Milesia, and on their way, when¬ 
ever they saw in the waste and desolate country 
any land that was well farmed, they took 
down the names of the owners in their tablets; 
and having thus gone through the whole re¬ 
gion, and obtained after all but few names, 
they called the people together on their return 
to Miletus, and made proclamation that they 
gave the government into the hands of those 
persons whose lands they had found well 
farmed; for they thought it likely (they said) 
that the same persons who had managed their 
own affairs well would likewise conduct aright 
the business of the state. The other Milesians, 
who in time past had been at variance, they 
placed under the rule of these men. Thus was 
the Milesian government set in order by the 
Parians. 

30. It was, however, from the two cities 
above mentioned that troubles began now to 
gather again about Ionia; and this is the way 
in which they arose. Certain of the rich men 
had been banished from Naxos by the com¬ 
monalty, and, upon their banishment, had fled 
to Miletus. Aristagoras, son of Molpagoras, the 
nephew and likewise the son-in-law of Histiae- 
us, son of Lysagoras, who was still kept by 
Darius at Susa, happened to be regent of Mile¬ 
tus at the time of their coming. For the kingly 
power belonged to Histiaeus; but he was at 
Susa when the Naxians came. Now these Nax- 
ians had in times past been bond-friends of 
Histiaeus; and so on their arrival at Miletus 
they addressed themselves to Aristagoras and 
begged him to lend them such aid as his abil¬ 
ity allowed, in hopes thereby to recover their 
country. Then Aristagoras, considering with 
himself that, if the Naxians should be restored 
by his help, he would be lord of Naxos, put for¬ 
ward the friendship with Histiaeus to cloak 
his views, and spoke as follows:— 

“I cannot engage to furnish you with such 
a power as were needful to force you, against 
their will, upon the Naxians who hold the 
city; for I know they can bring into the field 
eight thousand bucklers, and have also a vast 
number of ships of war. But I will do all that 
lies in my power to get you some aid, and I 
think I can manage it in this way. Artaphernes 
happens to be my friend. Now he is a son of 
Hystaspes, and brother to King Darius. All 
the sea-coast of Asia is under him, and he has 


a numerous army and numerous ships. I think 
I can prevail on him to do what we require.” 

When the Naxians heard this, they empow¬ 
ered Aristagoras to manage the matter for 
them as well as he could, and told him to 
promise gifts and pay for the soldiers, which 
(they said) they would readily furnish, since 
they had great hope that the Naxians, so soon 
as they saw them returned, would render them 
obedience, and likewise the other islanders. 
For at that time not one of the Cyclades was 
subject to King Darius. 

31. So Aristagoras went to Sardis and told 
Artaphernes that Naxos was an island of no 
great size, but a fair land and fertile, lying 
near Ionia, and containing much treasure and 
a vast number of slaves. “Make war then upon 
this land (he said) and reinstate the exiles; for 
if thou wilt do this, first of all, I have very rich 
gifts in store for thee (besides the cost of the 
armament, which it is fair that we who are the 
authors of the war should pay); and, secondly, 
thou wilt bring under the power of the king 
not only Naxos but the other islands which de¬ 
pend on it, as Paros, Andros, and all the rest 
of the Cyclades. And when thou hast gained 
these, thou mayest easily go on against Euboea, 
which is a large and wealthy island not less in 
size than Cyprus, and very easy to bring un¬ 
der. A hundred ships were quite enough to 
subdue the whole.” The other answered— 
“Truly thou art the author of a plan which 
may much advantage the house of the king, 
and thy counsel is good in all points except the 
number of the ships. Instead of a hundred, two 
hundred shall be at thy disposal when the 
spring comes. But the king himself must first 
approve the undertaking.” 

32. When Aristagoras heard this he was 
greatly rejoiced, and went home in good heart 
to Miletus. And Artaphernes, after he had sent 
a messenger to Susa to lay the plans of Arista¬ 
goras before the king, and received his ap¬ 
proval of the undertaking, made ready a fleet 
of two hundred triremes and a vast army of 
Persians and their confederates. The command 
of these he gave to a Persian named Mega- 
bates, who belonged to the house of the Achae- 
menids, being nephew both to himself and to 
King Darius. It was to a daughter of this man 
that Pausanias the Lacedaemonian, the son of 
Cleombrotus (if at least there be any truth in 
the tale), was affianced many years afterwards, 
when he conceived the desire of becoming ty¬ 
rant of Greece. Artaphernes now, having 
named Megabates to the command, sent for- 



166 HERODOTUS [Book v 


ward the armament to Aristagoras. 

33. Megabates set sail, and, touching at 
Miletus, took on board Aristagoras with the 
Ionian troops and the Naxians; after which he 
steered, as he gave out, for the Hellespont; and 
when he reached Chios, he brought the fleet to 
anchor off Caucasa, being minded to wait there 
for a north wind, and then sail straight to 
Naxos. The Naxians however were not to per¬ 
ish at this time; and so the following events 
were brought about. As Megabates went his 
rounds to visit the watches on board the ships, 
he found a Myndian vessel upon which there 
was none set. Full of anger at such carelessness, 
he bade his guards to seek out the captain, one 
Scylax by name, and thrusting him through 
one of the holes in the ship's side, to fasten him 
there in such a way that his head might show 
outside the vessel, while his body remained 
within. When Scylax was thus fastened, one 
went and informed Aristagoras that Mega¬ 
bates had bound his Myndian friend and was 
entreating him shamefully. So he came and 
asked Megabates to let the man off; but the 
Persian refused him; whereupon Aristagoras 
went himself and set Scylax free. When Mega¬ 
bates heard this he was still more angry than 
before, and spoke hotly to Aristagoras. Then 
the latter said to him— 

“What hast thou to do with these matters? 
Wert thou not sent here by Artaphernes to 
obey me, and to sail whithersoever I ordered? 
Why dost meddle so?” 

Thus spake Aristagoras. The other, in high 
dudgeon at such language, waited till the 
night, and then despatched a boat to Naxos, 
to warn the Naxians of the coming danger. 

34. Now the Naxians up to this time had 
not had any suspicion that the armament was 
directed against them; as soon, therefore, as 
the message reached them, forthwith they 
brought within their walls all that they had in 
the open field, and made themselves ready 
against a siege by provisioning their town both 
with food and drink. Thus was Naxos placed 
in a posture of defence; and the Persians, when 
they crossed the sea from Chios, found the 
Naxians fully prepared for them. However 
they sat down before the place, and besieged it 
for four whole months. When at length all the 
stores which they had brought with them were 
exhausted, and Aristagoras had likewise spent 
upon the siege no small sum from his private 
means, and more was still needed to insure 
success, the Persians gave up the attempt, and 
first building certain forts, wherein they left 


the banished Naxians, withdrew to the main¬ 
land, having utterly failed in their undertak- 
ing. 

35. And now Aristagoras found himself 
quite unable to make good his promises to 
Artaphernes; nay, he was even hard pressed 
to meet the claims whereto he was liable for 
the pay of the troops; and at the same time his 
fear was great, lest, owing to the failure of the 
expedition and his own quarrel with Mega¬ 
bates, he should be ousted from the govern¬ 
ment of Miletus. These manifold alarms had 
already caused him to contemplate raising a 
rebellion, when the man with the marked head 
came from Susa, bringing him instructions on 
the part of Histiaeus to revolt from the king. 
For Histiaeus, when he was anxious to give 
Aristagoras orders to revolt, could find but one 
safe way, as the roads were guarded, of mak¬ 
ing his wishes known; which was by taking 
the trustiest of his slaves, shaving all the hair 
from od his head, and then pricking letters 
upon the skin, and waiting till the hair grew 
again. Thus accordingly he did; and as soon as 
ever the hair was grown, he despatched the 
man to Miletus, giving him no other message 
than this—“When thou art come to Miletus, 
bid Aristagoras shave thy head, and look there¬ 
on.” Now the marks on the head, as I have al¬ 
ready mentioned, were a command to revolt. 
All this Histiseus did because it irked him 
greatly to be kept at Susa, and because he had 
strong hopes that, if troubles broke out, he 
would be sent down to the coast to quell them, 
whereas, if Miletus made no movement, he did 
not see a chance of his ever again returning 
thither. 

36. Such, then, were the views which led 
Histiaeus to despatch his messenger; and it so 
chanced that all these several motives to revolt 
were brought to bear upon Aristagoras at one 
and the same time. 

Accordingly, at this conjuncture Aristagoras 
held a council of his trusty friends, and laid 
the business before them, telling them both 
what he had himself purposed, and what mes¬ 
sage had been sent him by Histiaeus. At this 
council all his friends were of the same way of 
thinking, and recommended revolt, except 
only Hecataeus the historian. He, first of all, 
advised them by all means to avoid engaging in 
war with the king of the Persians, whose 
might he set forth, and whose subject nations 
he enumerated. As however he could not in¬ 
duce them to listen to this counsel, he next ad¬ 
vised that they should do all that lay in their 







33 - 42 ] THE HISTORY 167 


power to make themselves masters of the sea. 
“There was one only way,” he said, “so far as 
he could see, of their succeeding in this. Mile¬ 
tus was, he knew, a weak state—but if the 
treasures in the temple at Branchidse, which 
Croesus the Lydian gave to it, were seized, he 
had strong hopes that the mastery of the sea 
might be thereby gained; at least it would give 
them money to begin the war, and would save 
the treasures from falling into the hands of the 
enemy.” Now these treasures were of very 
great value, as I showed in the first part of my 
History. The assembly, however, rejected the 
counsel of Hecatseus, while, nevertheless, they 
resolved upon a revolt. One of their number, 
it was agreed, should sail to Myus, where the 
fleet had been lying since its return from Nax¬ 
os, and endeavour to seize the captains who 
had gone there with the vessels. 

37. latragoras accordingly was despatched 
on this errand, and he took with guile Oliatus 
the son of Ibanolis the Mylassian, and Histiae- 
us the son of Tymnes the Termerean—Coes 
likewise, the son of Erxander, to whom Darius 
gave Mytilene, and Aristagoras the son of Her- 
aclides the Cymaean, and also many others. 
Thus Aristagoras revolted openly from Dari¬ 
us; and now he set to work to scheme against 
him in every possible way. First of all, in or¬ 
der to induce the Milesians to join heartily in 
the revolt, he gave out that he laid down his 
own lordship over Miletus, and in lieu thereof 
established a commonwealth: after which, 
throughout all Ionia he did the like; for from 
some of the cities he drove out their tyrants, 
and to others, whose goodwill he hoped there¬ 
by to gain, he handed theirs over, thus giving 
up all the men whom he had seized at the Nax- 
ian fleet, each to the city whereto he belonged. 

38. Now the Mytileneans had no sooner got 
Coes into their power, than they led him forth 
from the city and stoned him; the Cymaeans, 
on the other hand, allowed their tyrant to go 
free; as likewise did most of the others. And 
so this form of government ceased throughout 
all the cities. Aristagoras the Milesian, after he 
had in this way put down the tyrants, and 

1 bidden the cities choose themselves captains in 

I their room, sailed away himself on board a 

) trireme to Lacedaemon; for he had great need 
of obtaining the aid of some powerful ally. 

39. At Sparta, Anaxandridas the son of Leo 
was no longer king: he had died, and his son 
Cleomenes had mounted the throne, not how¬ 
ever by right of merit, but of birth. Anaxan- 

, dridas took to wife his own sister’s daughter. 


and was tenderly attached to her; but no chil¬ 
dren came from the marriage. Hereupon the 
Ephors called him before them, and said—“If 
thou hast no care for thine own self, neverthe¬ 
less cannot allow this, nor suffer the race 
of Eurysthenes to die out from among us. 
Come then, as thy present wife bears thee no 
children, put her away, and wed another. So 
wilt thou do what is well-pleasing to the Spar¬ 
tans.” Anaxandridas however refused to do as 
they required, and said it was no good advice 
the Ephors gave, to bid him put away his wife 
when she had done no wrong, and take to him¬ 
self another. He therefore declined to obey 
them. 

40. Then the Ephors and Elders took coun¬ 
sel together, and laid this proposal before the 
king:—“Since thou art so fond, as we see thee 
to be, of thy present wife, do what we now ad¬ 
vise, and gainsay us not, lest the Spartans make 
some unwonted decree concerning thee. We 
ask thee not now to put away thy wife to 
whom thou art married—give her still the 
same love and honour as ever—but take thee 
another wife beside, who may bear thee chil¬ 
dren.” 

When he heard this offer, Anaxandridas 
gave way—and henceforth he lived with two 
wives in two separate houses, quite against all 
Spartan custom. 

41. In a short time, the wife whom he had 
last married bore him a son, who received the 
name of Cleomenes; and so the heir to the 
throne was brought into the world by her. Af¬ 
ter this, the first wife also, who in time past 
had been barren, by some strange chance con¬ 
ceived, and came to be with child. Then the 
friends of the second wife, when they heard a 
rumour of the truth, made a great stir, and 
said it was a false boast, and she meant, they 
were sure, to bring forward as her own a sup¬ 
posititious child. So they raised an outcry 
against her; and therefore, when her full time 
was come, the Ephors, who were themselves 
incredulous, sat round her bed, and kept a 
strict watch on the labour. At this time then 
she bore Dorieus, and after him, quickly, Le¬ 
onidas, and after him, again quickly, Cleom- 
brotus. Some even say that Leonidas and Cle- 
ombrotus were twins. On the other hand, the 
second wife, the mother of Cleomenes (who 
was a daughter of Prinetadas, the son of De- 
marmenus), never gave birth to a second 
child. 

42. Now Cleomenes, it is said, was not right 
in his mind; indeed he verged upon madness; 



168 HERODOTUS [Book v 


while Dorieus surpassed all his co-mates, and 
looked confidently to receiving the kingdom 
on the score of merit. When, therefore, after 
the death of Anaxandridas, the Spartans kept 
to the law, and made Cleomenes, his eldest son, 
king in his room, Dorieus, who had imagined 
that he should be chosen, and who could not 
bear the thought of having such a man as Cle¬ 
omenes to rule over him, asked the Spartans to 
give him a body of men, and left Sparta with 
them in order to found a colony. However, he 
neither took counsel of the oracle at Delphi as 
to the place whereto he should go, nor observed 
any of the customary usages; but left Sparta 
in dudgeon, and sailed away to Libya, under 
the guidance of certain men who were Therae- 
ans. These men brought him to Cinyps, where 
he colonised a spot, which has not its equal in 
all Libya, on the banks of a river: but from 
this place he was driven in the third year by 
the Macians, the Libyans, and the Carthagini¬ 
ans. 

43. Dorieus returned to the Peloponnese; 
whereupon Antichares the Eleonian gave him 
a counsel (which he got from the oracle of 
Laius), to “found the city of Heraclea in Sic¬ 
ily; the whole country of Eryx belonged,” he 
said, “to the Heracleids, since Hercules him¬ 
self conquered it.” On receiving this advice, 
Dorieus went to Delphi to inquire of the ora¬ 
cle whether he would take the place to which 
he was about to go. The Pythoness prophesied 
that he would; whereupon Dorieus went back 
to Libya, took up the men who had sailed with 
him at the first, and proceeded upon his way 
along the shores of Italy. 

44. Just at this time, the Sybarites say, they 
and their king Telys were about to make war 
upon Crotona, and the Crotoniats, greatly 
alarmed, besought Dorieus to lend them aid. 
Dorieus was prevailed upon, bore part in the 
war against Sybaris, and had a share in taking 
the town. Such is the account which the Syba¬ 
rites give of what was done by Dorieus and 
his companions. The Crotoniats, on the other 
hand, maintain that no foreigner lent them aid 
in their war against the Sybarites, save and ex¬ 
cept Callias the Elean, a soothsayer of the race 
of the lamidae; and he only forsook Telys the 
Sybaritic king, and deserted to their side, when 
he found on sacrificing that the victims were 
not favourable to an attack on Crotona. Such 
is the account which each party gives of these 
matters. 

45. Both parties likewise adduce testimonies 
to the truth of what they say. The Sybarites 


show a temple and sacred precinct near the dry \ 
stream of the Crastis, which they declare that j 
Dorieus, after taking their city, dedicated to 
Minerva Crastias. And further, they bring for- | 
ward the death of Dorieus as the surest proof; [ 
since he fell, they say, because he disobeyed the S 
oracle. For had he in nothing varied from the 
directions given him, but confined himself to 
the business on which he was sent, he would 
assuredly have conquered the Erycian terri¬ 
tory, and kept possession of it, instead of per¬ 
ishing with all his followers. The Crotoniats, 
on the other hand, point to the numerous allot¬ 
ments within their borders which were as- } 
signed to Callias the Elean by their country- ! 
men, and which to my day remained in the I 
possession of his family; while Dorieus and his I 
descendants (they remark) possess nothing. 
Yet if Dorieus had really helped them in the 
Sybaritic war. he would have received very 
much more than Callias. Such are the testi¬ 
monies which are adduced on either side; it 
is open to every man to adopt whichever view 
he deems the best. 

46. Certain Spartans accompanied Dorieus 

on his voyage as co-founders, to wit, Thes- 
salus, Paraebates, Celeas, and Euryleon. These i 
men and all the troops under their command || 
reached Sicily; but there they fell in a battle if, 
wherein they were defeated by the Egestaeans |i 
and Phoenicians, only one, Euryleon, surviv- i 
ing the disaster. He then, collecting the rem- ij 
nants of the beaten army, made himself master n 
of Minoa, the Selinusian colony, and helped M 
the Selinusians to throw off the yoke of their M 
tyrant Peithagoras. Having upset Peithagoras, 
he sought to become tyrant in his room, and he 
even reigned at Selinus for a brief space—but 
after a while the Selinusians rose up in revolt 
against him, and though he fled to the altar of 
Jupiter Agoraeus, they notwithstanding put 
him to death. \ 

47. Another man who accompanied Dorieus, I 
and died with him, was Philip the son of Buta- 
cidas, a man of Crotona; who, after he had 
been betrothed to a daughter of Telys the Syb¬ 
arite, was banished from Crotona, whereupon 
his marriage came to nought; and he in his dis¬ 
appointment took ship and sailed to Cyrene. 
From thence he became a follower of Dorieus, 
furnishing to the fleet a trireme of his own, the 
crew of which he supported at his own charge. 
This Philip was an Olympian victor, and the 
handsomest Greek of his day. His beauty 
gained him honours at the hands of the Egest- 
aeans which they never accorded to any one 








43-51 ] THE HISTORY 169 


else; for they raised a hero-temple over his 
grave, and they still worship him with sacri¬ 
fices. 

48. Such then was the end of Dorieus, who 
if he had brooked the rule of Cleomenes, and 
remained in Sparta, would have been king of 
Lacedaemon; since Cleomenes, after reigning 
no great length of time, died without male off¬ 
spring, leaving behind him an only daughter, 
by name Gorgo. 

49. Cleomenes, however, was still king 
when Aristagoras, tyrant of Miletus, reached 
Sparta. At their interview, Aristagoras, accord¬ 
ing to the report of the Lacedaemonians, pro¬ 
duced a bronze tablet, whereupon the whole 
circuit of the earth was engraved, with all its 
seas and rivers. Discourse began between the 
two; and Aristagoras addressed the Spartan 
king in these words following:—“Think it not 
strange, O King Cleomenes, that I have been 
at the pains to sail hither; for the posture of 
affairs, which I will now recount unto thee, 
made it fitting. Shame and grief is it indeed 
to none so much as to us, that the sons of the 
lonians should have lost their freedom, and 
come to be the slaves of others; but yet it 
touches you likewise, O Spartans, beyond the 
rest of the Greeks, inasmuch as the pre-emi¬ 
nence over all Greece appertains to you. We 
beseech you, therefore, by the common gods 
of the Grecians, deliver the lonians, who are 
your own kinsmen, from slavery. Truly the 
task is not difficult; for the barbarians are an 
unwarlike people; and you are the best and 
bravest warriors in the whole world. Their 
mode of fighting is the following:^—they use 
bows and arrows and a short spear; they wear 
trousers in the field, and cover their heads with 
turbans. So easy are they to vanquish! Know 
too that the dwellers in these parts have more 
good things than all the rest of the world put 
together—gold, and silver, and brass, and em¬ 
broidered garments, beasts of burthen, and 
bond-servants—all which, if you only wish it, 
you may soon have for your own. The nations 
border on one another, in the order which I 
will now explain. Next to these lonians” (here 
he pointed with his finger to the map of the 
world which was engraved upon the tablet 
that he had brought with him) “these Lydians 
dwell; their soil is fertile, and few people are 
so rich in silver. Next to them,” he continued, 
“come these Phrygians, who have more flocks 
and herds than any race that I know, and 
more plentiful harvests. On them border the 
Cappadocians, whom we Greeks know by the 


name of Syrians: they are neighbours to the 
Cilicians, who extend all the way to this sea, 
where Cyprus (the island which you see here) 
lies. The Cilicians pay the king a yearly tribute 
of five hundred talents. Next to them come the 
Armenians, who live here—they too have nu¬ 
merous flocks and herds. After them come the 
Matieni, inhabiting this country; then Cissia, 
this province, where you see the river Cho- 
aspes marked, and likewise the town Susa 
upon its banks, where the Great King holds 
his court, and where the treasuries are in 
which his wealth is stored. Once masters of 
this city, you may be bold to vie with Jove him¬ 
self for riches. In the wars which ye wage with 
your rivals of Messenia, with them of Argos 
likewise and of Arcadia, about paltry bounda¬ 
ries and strips of land not so remarkably good, 
ye contend with those who have no gold, nor 
silver even, which often give men heart to 
fight and die. Must ye wage such wars, and 
when ye might so easily be lords of Asia, will 
ye decide otherwise.^” Thus spoke Aristagoras; 
and Cleomenes replied to him,—“Milesian 
stranger, three days hence I will give thee an 
answer.” 

50. So they proceeded no further at that 
time. When, however, the day appointed for 
the answer came, and the two once more met, 
Cleomenes asked Aristagoras, “how many 
days’ journey it was from the sea of the lonians 
to the king’s residence.^” Hereupon Arista¬ 
goras, who had managed the rest so cleverly, 
and succeeded in deceiving the king, tripped 
in his speech and blundered; for instead of 
concealing the truth, as he ought to have done 
if he wanted to induce the Spartans to cross 
into Asia, he said plainly that it was a journey 
of three months. Cleomenes caught at the 
words, and, preventing Aristagoras from fin¬ 
ishing what he had begun to say concerning 
the road, addressed him thus:—“Milesian 
stranger, quit Sparta before sunset. This is no 
good proposal that thou makest to the Lacedae¬ 
monians, to conduct them a distance of three 
months’ journey from the sea.” When he had 
thus spoken, Cleomenes went to his home. 

51. But Aristagoras took an olive-bough in 
his hand, and hastened to the king’s house, 
where he was admitted by reason of his sup¬ 
pliant’s guise. Gorgo, the daughter of Cleo¬ 
menes, and his only child, a girl of about eight 
or nine years of age, happened to he there, 
standing by her father’s side. Aristagoras, see¬ 
ing her, requested Cleomenes to send her out 
of the room before he began to speak with 



170 HERODOTUS [Book v 


him; but Cleomenes told him to say on, and 
not mind the child. So Aristagoras began with 
a promise of ten talents if the king would 
grant him his request, and when Cleomenes 
shook his head, contined to raise his offer till 
it reached fifty talents; whereupon the child 
spoke:—“Father,” she said, “get up and go, or 
the stranger will certainly corrupt thee.” Then 
Cleomenes, pleased at the warning of his child, 
withdrew and went into another room. Arista¬ 
goras quitted Sparta for good, not being able 
to discourse any more concerning the road 
which led up to the king. 

52. Now the true account of the road in 
question is the following:—Royal stations ex¬ 
ist along its whole length, and excellent cara¬ 
vanserais; and throughout, it traverses an in¬ 
habited tract, and is free from danger. In Lyd¬ 
ia and Phrygia there are twenty stations within 
a distance of 94 K parasangs. On leaving Phry¬ 
gia the Halys has to be crossed; and here are 
gates through which you must needs pass ere 
you can traverse the stream. A strong force 
guards this post. When you have made the 
passage, and are come into Cappadocia, 28 
stations and 104 parasangs bring you to the 
borders of Cilicia, where the road passes 
through two sets of gates, at each of which 
there is a guard posted. Leaving these behind, 
you go on through Cilicia, where you find 
three stations in a distance of 1554 parasangs. 
The boundary between Cilicia and Armenia is 
the river Euphrates, which it is necessary to 
cross in boats. In Armenia the resting-places 
are 15 in number, and the distance is 56J4 
parasangs. There is one place where a guard is 
posted. Four large streams intersect this dis¬ 
trict, all of which have to be crossed by means 
of boats. The first of these is the Tigris; the 
second and the third have both of them the 
same name, though they are not only different 
rivers, but do not even run from the same place. 
For the one which I have called the first of 
the two has its source in Armenia, while the 
other flows afterwards out of the country of 
the Matienians. The fourth of the streams is 
called the Gyndes, and this is the river which 
Cyrus dispersed by digging for it three hun¬ 
dred and sixty channels. Leaving Armenia and 
entering the Matienian country, you have four 
stations; these passed you find yourself in Cis- 
sia, where eleven stations and 4254 parasangs 
bring you to another navigable stream, the 
Choaspes, on the banks of which the city of 
Susa is built. Thus the entire number of the 
stations is raised to one hundred and eleven; 


and so many are in fact the resting-places that 
one finds between Sardis and Susa. 

53. If then the royal road be measured 
aright, and the parasang equals, as it does, thir¬ 
ty furlongs, the whole distance from Sardis to 
the palace of Memnon (as it is called), 
amounting thus to 450 parasangs, would be 
13,500 furlongs. Travelling then at the rate of 
150 furlongs a day, one will take exactly ninety 
days to perform the journey. 

54. Thus when Aristagoras the Milesian 
told Cleomenes the Lacedaemonian that it was 
a three months’ journey from the sea up to the 
king, he said no more than the truth. The ex¬ 
act distance (if any one desires still greater ac¬ 
curacy) is somewhat more; for the journey 
from Ephesus to Sardis must be added to the 
foregoing account; and this will make the 
whole distance between the Greek Sea and 
Susa (or the city of Memnon, as it is called) 
14,040 furlongs; since Ephesus is distant from 
Sardis 540 furlongs. This would add three 
days to the three months’ journey. 

55. When Aristagoras left Sparta he has¬ 
tened to Athens, which had got quit of its ty¬ 
rants in the way that I will now describe. After 
the death of Hipparchus (the son of Pisistratus, 
and brother of the tyrant Hippias), who, in 
spite of the clear warning he had received con¬ 
cerning his fate in a dream, was slain by Har- 
modius and Aristogeiton (men both of the 
race of the Gephyraeans), the oppression of the 
Athenians continued by the space of four 
years; and they gained nothing, but were 
worse used than before. 

56. Now the dream of Hipparchus was the 
following:—The night before the Panathenaic 
festival, he thought he saw in his sleep a tall 
and beautiful man, who stood over him, and 
read him the following riddle:— 

Bear thoti unbearable woes with the all-bearing 

heart of a lion; 

Never, be sure, shall wrong-doer escape the reward 

of wrong-doing. 

As soon as day dawned he sent and submitted 
his dream to the interpreters, after which he 
oflFered the averting sacrifices, and then went 
and led the procession in which he perished. 

57. The family of the Gephyraeans, to which 
the murderers of Hipparchus belonged, ac¬ 
cording to their own account, came originally 
from Eretria. My inquiries, however, have 
made it clear to me that they are in reality 
Phoenicians, descendants of those who came 
with Cadmus into the country now called Boe- 
otia. Here they received for their portion the 




52 - 63 ] THE HISTORY 171 


district of Tanagra, in which they afterwards 
dwelt. On their expulsion from this country by 
the Boeotians (which happened some time af¬ 
ter that of the Cadmeians from the same parts 
by the Argives) they took refuge at Athens. 
The Athenians received them among their cit¬ 
izens upon set terms, whereby they were ex¬ 
cluded from a number of privileges which are 
not worth mentioning. 

58. Now the Phoenicians who came with 
Cadmus, and to whom the Gephyraei be¬ 
longed, introduced into Greece upon their ar¬ 
rival a great variety of arts, among the rest that 
of writing, whereof the Greeks till then had, 
as I think, been ignorant. And originally they 
shaped their letters exactly like all the other 
Phoenicians, but afterwards, in course of time, 
they changed by degrees their language, and 
together with it the form likewise of their 
characters. Now the Greeks who dwelt about 
those parts at that time were chiefly the loni- 
ans. The Phoenician letters were accordingly 
adopted by them, but with some variation in 
the shape of a few, and so they arrived at the 
present use, still calling the letters Phoenician, 
as justice required, after the name of those 
who were the first to introduce them into 
Greece. Paper rolls also were called from of 
old “parchments’" by the lonians, because for¬ 
merly when paper was scarce they used, in¬ 
stead, the skins of sheep and goats—on which 
material many of the barbarians are even now 
wont to write. 

59. I myself saw Cadmeian characters en¬ 
graved upon some tripods in the temple of 
Apollo Ismenias in Boeotian Thebes, most of 
them shaped like the Ionian. One of the tri¬ 
pods has the inscription following:— 

Me did Amphitryon place, from the far Teleboans 

coming. 

This would be about the age of Laius, the son 
of Labdacus, the son of Polydorus, the son of 
Cadmus. 

60. Another of the tripods has this legend 
in the hexameter measure:— 

/ to far-shooting Phoebus was offered by Scceus 

the boxer, 

When he had won at the games—a wondrous 

beautiful offering. 

This might be Scaeus, the son of Hippocoon; 
and the tripod, if dedicated by him, and not by 
another of the same name, would belong to 
the time of CEdipus, the son of Laius. 

61. The third tripod has also an inscription 
in hexameters, which runs thus:— 


King iModamas gave this tripod to far-seeing 

Phoebus, 

When he was set on the throne—a wondrous 

beautiful offering. 

It was in the reign of this Laodamas, the son 
of Eteocles, that the Cadmeians were driven 
by the Argives out of their country, and found 
a shelter with the Encheleans. The Gephyrae- 
ans at that time remained in the country, but 
afterwards they retired before the Bmotians, 
and took refuge at Athens, where they have a 
number of temples for their separate use, 
which the other Athenians are not allowed to 
enter—among the rest, one of Achaean Ceres, 
in whose honour they likewise celebrate special 
orgies. 

62. Having thus related the dream which 
Hipparchus saw, and traced the descent of the 
Gephyraeans, the family whereto his murder¬ 
ers belonged, I must proceed with the matter 
whereof I was intending before to speak; to 
wit, the way in which the Athenians got quit 
of their tyrants. Upon the death of Hippar¬ 
chus, Hippias, who was king, grew harsh to¬ 
wards the Athenians; and the Alcmsonidae, an 
Athenian family which had been banished by 
the Pisistratidae, joined the other exiles, and 
endeavoured to procure their own return, and 
to free Athens, by force. They seized and forti¬ 
fied Leipsydrium above Paeonia, and tried to 
gain their object by arms; but great disasters 
befell them, and their purpose remained unac¬ 
complished. They therefore resolved to shrink 
from no contrivance that might bring them 
success; and accordingly they contracted with 
the Amphictyons to build the temple which 
now stands at Delphi, but which in those days 
did not exist. Having done this, they proceed¬ 
ed, being men of great wealth and members of 
an ancient and distinguished family, to build 
the temple much more magnificently than the 
plan obliged them. Besidesother improvements, 
instead of the coarse stone whereof by the con¬ 
tract the temple was to have been constructed, 
they made the facings of Parian marble. 

63. These same men, if we may believe the 
Athenians, during their stay at Delphi per¬ 
suaded the Pythoness by a bribe to tell the 
Spartans, whenever any of them came to con¬ 
sult the oracle, either on their own private 
affairs or on the business of the state, that they 
must free Athens. So the Lacedxmonians, 
when they found no answer ever returned to 
them but this, sent at last Anchimolius, the son 
of Aster—a man of note among their citizens 
—at the head of an army against Athens, with 



172 HERODOTUS TBook v 


orders to drive out the Pisistratidae, albeit they 
were bound to them by the closest ties of friend¬ 
ship. For they esteemed the things of heaven 
more highly than the things of men. The troops 
went by sea and were conveyed in transports. 
Anchimolius brought them to an anchorage at 
Phalerum; and there the men disembarked. 
But the Pisistratidae, who had previous knowl¬ 
edge of their intentions, had sent to Thessaly, 
between which country and Athens there was 
an alliance, with a request for aid. The Thes¬ 
salians, in reply to their entreaties, sent them 
by a public vote looo horsemen, under the 
command of their king, Cineas, who was a 
Coniaean. When this help came, the Pisistra- 
tidae laid their plan accordingly: they cleared 
the whole plain about Phalerum so as to make 
it fit for the movements of cavalry, and then 
charged the enemy’s camp with their horse, 
which fell with such fury upon the Lacedae¬ 
monians as to kill numbers, among the rest 
Anchimolius, the general, and to drive the re¬ 
mainder to their ships. Such was the fate of 
the first army sent from Lacedaemon, and the 
tomb of Anchimolius may be seen to this day 
in Attica; it is at Alopecae (Foxtown), near 
the temple of Hercules in Cynosargos. 

64. Afterwards, the Lacedaemonians des¬ 
patched a larger force against Athens, which 
they put under the command of Cleomenes, 
son of Anaxandridas, one of their kings. These 
troops were not sent by sea, but marched by 
the mainland. When they were come into At¬ 
tica, their first encounter was with the Thes¬ 
salian horse, which they shortly put to flight, 
killing above forty men; the remainder made 
good their escape, and fled straight to Thessaly. 
Cleomenes proceeded to the city, and, with 
the aid of such of the Athenians as wished for 
freedom, besieged the tyrants, who had shut 
themselves up in the Pelasgic fortress. 

65. And now there had been small chance 
of the Pisistratidae falling into the hands of the 
Spartans, who did not even design to sit down 
before the place, which had moreover been 
well provisioned beforehand with stores both 
of meat and drink,—nay, it is likely that after 
a few days’ blockade the Lacedaemonians 
would have quitted Attica altogether, and gone 
back to Sparta—had not an event occurred 
most unlucky for the besieged, and most ad¬ 
vantageous for the besiegers. The children of 
the Pisistratidae were made prisoners, as they 
were being removed out of the country. By this 
calamity all their plans were deranged, and— 
as the ransom of their children—they con¬ 


sented to the demands of the Athenians, and 1 
agreed within five days’ time to quit Attica. | 
Accordingly they soon afterwards left the | 
country, and withdrew to Sigeum on the Sea- | 
mander, after reigning thirty-six years over j 
the Athenians. By descent they were Pylians, 
of the family of the Neleids, to which Codrus 
and Melanthus likewise belonged, men who in 
former times from foreign settlers became 
kings of Athens. And hence it was that Hip¬ 
pocrates came to think of calling his son Pisis- 
tratus: he named him after the Pisistratus who 
was a son of Nestor. Such then was the mode 
in which the Athenians got quit of their ty¬ 
rants. What they did and suffered worthy of 
note from the time when they gained their 
freedom until the revolt of Ionia from King 
Darius, and the coming of Aristagoras to Ath- i 
ens with a request that the Athenians would 
lend the lonians aid, 1 shall now proceed to re¬ 
late. 

66. The power of Athens had been great be¬ 
fore; but, now that the tyrants were gone, it 
became greater than ever. The chief authority 
was lodged with two persons, Clisthenes, of 
the family of the Alcmaeonids, who is said to 
have been the persuader of the Pythoness, and 
Isagoras, the son of Tisander, who belonged |' 
to a noble house, but whose pedigree I am not f| 
able to trace further. Howbeit his kinsmen I 
offer sacrifice to the Carian Jupiter. These 
two men strove together for the mastery; and 
Clisthenes, finding himself the weaker, called 
to his aid the common people. Hereupon, in¬ 
stead of the four tribes among which the 
Athenians had been divided hitherto, Clis¬ 
thenes made ten tribes, and parcelled out the 
Athenians among them. He likewise changed | 
the names of the tribes; for whereas they had 
till now been called after Geleon, yTgicores, 
Argades, and Hoples, the four sons of Ion, 
Clisthenes set these names aside, and called 
his tribes after certain other heroes, all of 
whom were native, except Ajax. Ajax was as¬ 
sociated because, although a foreigner, he was 

a neighbour and an ally of Athens. 

67. My belief is that in acting thus he did 
but imitate his maternal grandfather, Clis¬ 
thenes, king of Sicyon. This king, when he 
was at war with Argos, put an end to the con¬ 
tests of the rhapsodists at Sicyon, because in 
the Homeric poems Argos and the Argives 
were so constantly the theme of song. He like¬ 
wise conceived the wish to drive Adrastus, the 
son of Talaiis, out of his country, seeing that 
he was an Argive hero. For Adrastus had a 







64 - 72 ] THE HISTORY 173 


shrine at Sicyon, which yet stands in the mar¬ 
ket-place of the town. Clisthenes therefore 
went to Delphi, and asked the oracle if he 
might expel Adrastus. To this the Pythoness is 
reported to have answered—“Adrastus is the 
Sicyonians’ king, but thou art only a robber.” 
So when the god would not grant his request, 
he went home and began to think how he 
might contrive to make Adrastus withdraw of 
his own accord. After a while he hit upon a 
plan which he thought would succeed. He sent 
envoys to Thebes in Bceotia, and informed 
the Thebans that he wished to bring Melanip- 
pus, the son of Astacus, to Sicyon. The The¬ 
bans consenting, Clisthenes carried Melanip- 
pus back with him, assigned him a precinct 
within the government-house, and built him a 
shrine there in the safest and strongest part. 
The reason for his so doing (which I must not 
forbear to mention) was because Melanippus 
was Adrastus’ great enemy, having slain both 
his brother Mecistes and his son-in-law Tydeus. 
Clisthenes, after assigning the precinct to Mel¬ 
anippus, took away from Adrastus the sacri¬ 
fices and festivals wherewith he had till then 
been honoured, and transferred them to his 
adversary. Hitherto the Sicyonians had paid 
extraordinary honours to Adrastus, because the 
country had belonged to Polybus, and Adras¬ 
tus was Polybus’ daughter’s son; whence it 
came to pass that Polybus, dying childless, left 
Adrastus his kingdom. Besides other ceremo¬ 
nies, it had been their wont to honour Adras¬ 
tus with tragic choruses, which they assigned 
to him rather than Bacchus, on account of his 
calamities. Clisthenes now gave the choruses 
to Bacchus, transferring to Melanippus the 
rest of the sacred rites. 

68. Such were his doings in the matter of 
Adrastus. With respect to the Dorian tribes, 
not choosing the Sicyonians to have the same 
tribes as the Argives, he changed all the old 
names for new ones; and here he took special 
occasion to mock the Sicyonians, for he drew 
his new names from the words "'pig,'' and 
“ass,” adding thereto the usual tribe-endings; 
only in the case of his own tribe he did nothing 
of the sort, but gave them a name drawn from 
his own kingly office. For he called his own 
tribe the Archelai’, or Rulers, while the others 
he named Hyatae, or Pig-folk, Oneatae, or Ass- 
folk, and Choereatae, or Swine-folk. The Sicy¬ 
onians kept these names, not only during the 
reign of Clisthenes, but even after his death, 
by the space of sixty years: then, however, they 
took counsel together, and changed to the well- 


known names of Hyllaeans, Pamphylians, and 
Dymanatae, taking at the same time, as a 
fourth name, the title of ^gialeans, from ^Egi- 
aleus the son of Adrastus. 

69. Thus had Clisthenes the Sicyonian done. 
The Athenian Clisthenes, who was grandson 
by the mother’s side of the other, and had been 
named after him, resolved, from contempt (as 
I believe) of the lonians, that his tribes should 
not be the same as theirs; and so followed the 
pattern set him by his namesake of Sicyon. 
Having brought entirely over to his own side 
the common people of Athens, whom he had 
before disdained, he gave all the tribes new 
names, and made the number greater than for¬ 
merly; instead of the four phylarchs he estab¬ 
lished ten; he likewise placed ten demes in 
each of the tribes; and he was, now that the 
common people took his part, very much more 
powerful than his adversaries. 

70. Isagoras in his turn lost ground; and 
therefore, to counter-plot his enemy, he called 
in Cleomenes the Lacedaemonian, who had al¬ 
ready, at the time when he was besieging the 
Pisistratidae, made a contract of friendship with 
him. A charge is even brought against Cleo¬ 
menes that he was on terms of too great fa¬ 
miliarity with Isagoras’s wife. At this time the 
first thing that he did was to send a herald 
and require that Clisthenes, and a large num¬ 
ber of Athenians besides, whom he called “The 
Accursed,” should leave Athens. This message 
he sent at the suggestion of Isagoras: for in 
the affair referred to, the blood-guiltiness lay 
on the Alcmaeonidae and their partisans, while 
he and his friends were quite clear of it. 

71. The way in which “The Accursed” at 
Athens got their name, was the following. 
There was a certain Athenian called Cylon, a 
victor at the Olympic Games, who aspired to 
the sovereignty, and aided by a number of his 
companions, who were of the same age with 
himself, made an attempt to seize the citadel. 
But the attack failed; and Cylon became a sup¬ 
pliant at the image. Hereupon the Heads of 
the Naucraries, who at that time bore rule in 
Athens, induced the fugitives to remove by a 
promise to spare their lives. Nevertheless they 
were all slain; and the blame was laid on the 
Alcmaconidae. All this happened before the 
time of Pisistratus. 

72. When the message of Cleomenes ar¬ 
rived, requiring Clisthenes and “The Ac¬ 
cursed” to quit the city, Clisthenes departed of 
his own accord. Cleomenes, however, notwith¬ 
standing his departure, came to Athens, with 


174 HERODOTUS [ Book v 


a small band of followers; and on his arrival 
sent into banishment seven hundred Athenian 
families, which were pointed out to him by 
Isagoras. Succeeding here, he next endeav¬ 
oured to dissolve the council, and to put the 
government into the hands of three hundred 
of the partisans of that leader. But the council 
resisted, and refused to obey his orders; where¬ 
upon Cleomenes, Isagoras, and their followers 
took possession of the citadel. Here they were 
attacked by the rest of the Athenians, who 
took the side of the council, and were besieged 
for the space of two days: on the third day they 
accepted terms, being allowed—at least such 
of them as were Lacedaemonians—to quit the 
country. And so the word which came to Cleo¬ 
menes received its fulfilment. For when he 
first went up into the citadel, meaning to seize 
it, just as he was entering the sanctuary of the 
goddess, in order to question her, the priestess 
arose from her throne, before he had passed 
the doors, and said—“Stranger from Lacedae¬ 
mon, depart hence, and presume not to enter 
the holy place—it is not lawful for a Dorian to 
set foot there.” But he answered, “Oh! woman, 
I am not a Dorian, but an Achaean.” Slighting 
this warning, Cleomenes made his attempt, 
and so he was forced to retire, together with 
his Lacedaemonians. The rest were cast into 
prison by the Athenians, and condemned to 
die—among them Timasitheiis the Delphian, 
of whose prowess and courage I have great 
things which I could tell. 

73. So these men died in prison. The Athen¬ 
ians directly afterwards recalled Clisthenes, 
and the seven hundred families which Cleo¬ 
menes had driven out; and, further, they sent 
envoys to Sardis, to make an alliance with the 
Persians, for they knew that war would fol¬ 
low with Cleomenes and the Lacedaemonians. 
When the ambassadors reached Sardis and de¬ 
livered their message, Artaphernes, son of Hys- 
taspes, who was at that time governor of the 
place, inquired of them “who they were, and 
in what part of the world they dwelt, that they 
wanted to become allies of the Persians.^” The 
messengers told him; upon which he answered 
them shortly—that “if the Athenians chose to 
give earth and water to King Darius, he 
would conclude an alliance with them; but if 
not, they might go home again.” After con¬ 
sulting together, the envoys, anxious to form 
the alliance, accepted the terms; but on their 
return to Athens, they fell into deep disgrace 
on account of their compliance. 

74. Meanwhile Cleomenes, who considered 


himself to have been insulted by the Athenians i 
both in word and deed, was drawing a force j 
together from all parts of the Peloponnese, \ 
without informing any one of his object; f 
which was to revenge himself on the Athen- jj 
ians, and to establish Isagoras, who had es- j, 
caped with him from the citadel, as despot of 
Athens. Accordingly, with a large army, he in- S 
vaded the district of Eleusis, while the Bceoti- j 
ans, who had concerted measures with him, I 
took CEnoe and Hysis, two country towns | 
upon the frontier; and at the same time the | 
Chalcideans, on another side, plundered divers S 
places in Attica. The Athenians, notwithstand¬ 
ing that danger threatened them from every 
quarter, put off all thought of the Bceotians 
and Chalcideans till a future time, and ! 
marched against the Peloponnesians, who i 
were at Eleusis. ! 

75. As the two hosts were about to engage, 
first of all the Corinthians, bethinking them¬ 
selves that they were perpetrating a wrong, 
changed their minds, and drew off from the 
main army. Then Demaratus, son of Ariston, | 
who was himself king of Sparta and joint- H 
leader of the expedition, and who till now had I 
had no sort of quarrel with Cleomenes, fob n 
lowed their example. On account of this rup- I 
ture between the kings, a law was passed at I 
Sparta, forbidding both monarchs to go out 
together with the army, as had been the cus¬ 
tom hitherto. The law also provided, that, as 
one of the kings was to be left behind, one of 
the Tyndaridse should also remain at home; 
whereas hitherto both had accompanied the 
expeditions, as auxiliaries. So when the rest of 
the allies saw that the Lacedaemonian kings 
were not of one mind, and that the Corinthian 
troops had quitted their post, they likewise 
drew off and departed. 

76. This was the fourth time that the Dori¬ 
ans had invaded Attica: twice they came as 
enemies, and twice they came to do good serv¬ 
ice to the Athenian people. Their first invasion 
took place at the period when they founded 
Megara, and is rightly placed in the reign of 
Codrus at Athens; the second and third occa¬ 
sions were when they came from Sparta to 
drive out the Pisistratidas; the fourth was the 
present attack, when Cleomenes, at the head 
of a Peloponnesian army, entered at Eleusis. 
Thus the Dorians had now four times invaded 
Attica. 

77. So when the Spartan army had broken 
up from its quarters thus ingloriously, the 
Athenians, wishing to revenge themselves. 






73 - 82 ] THE HISTORY 175 


marched first against the Chalcideans. The 
Boeotians, however, advancing to the aid of the 
latter as far as the Euripus, the Athenians 
thought it best to attack them first. A battle 
was fought accordingly; and the Athenians 
gained a very complete victory, killing a vast 
number of the enemy, and taking seven hun¬ 
dred of them alive. After this, on the very same 
day, they crossed into Euboea, and engaged 
the Chalcideans with the like success; where¬ 
upon they left four thousand settlers^ upon the 
lands of the Hippobotae,^—which is the name 
the Chalcideans give to their rich men. All the 
Chalcidean prisoners whom they took were 
put in irons, and kept for a long time in close 
confinement, as likewise were the Boeotians, 
until the ransom asked for them was paid; and 
this the Athenians fixed at two minae the man. 
The chains wherewith they were fettered the 
Athenians suspended in their citadel; where 
they were still to be seen in my day, hanging 
against the wall scorched by the Median 
flames, opposite the chapel which faces the 
west. The Athenians made an offering of the 
tenth part of the ransom-money: and expend¬ 
ed it on the brazen chariot drawn by four 
steeds, which stands on the left hand immedi¬ 
ately that one enters the gateway of the citadel. 
The inscription runs as follows:— 

When Chalcis and Boeotia dared her might, 
Athens subdued their pride in valorous fight; 

Gave bonds for insults; and, the ransom paid. 
From the full tenths these steeds for Pallas made. 

78. Thus did the Athenians increase in 
strength. And it is plain enough, not from this 
instance only, but from many everywhere, that 
freedom is an excellent thing; since even the 
Athenians, who, while they continued under 
the rule of tyrants, were not a whit more vali¬ 
ant than any of their neighbours, no sooner 
shook off the yoke than they became decidedly 
the first of all. These things show that, while 
undergoing oppression, they let themselves be 
beaten, since then they worked for a master; 
but so soon as they got their freedom, each 
man was eager to do the best he could for him¬ 
self. So fared it now with the Athenians. 

79. Meanwhile the Thebans, who longed to 
be revenged on the Athenians, had sent to the 
oracle, and been told by the Pythoness that of 
their own strength they would be unable to 

^Literally, “allotment-holders” (KXrjpovxoi.)• 

^The Chalcidean Hippobotae, or “horse-keep¬ 
ers,” were a wealthy aristocracy and correspond to 
the knights (linrets) of most Grecian states, and 
the “equites,” or “celeres,” of the Romans. 


accomplish their wish: “they must lay the mat¬ 
ter,” she said, “before the many-voiced, and 
ask the aid of those nearest them.” The mes¬ 
sengers, therefore, on their return, called a 
meeting, and laid the answer of the oracle be¬ 
fore the people, who no sooner heard the ad¬ 
vice to “ask the aid of those nearest them” 
than they exclaimed—“What! are not they 
who dwell the nearest to us the men of Tana- 
gra, of Coronaea, and Thespiae? Yet these men 
always fight on our side, and have aided us 
with a good heart all through the war. Of 
what use is it to ask them? But maybe this is 
not the true meaning of the oracle.” 

80. As they were thus discoursing one with 
another, a certain man, informed of the debate, 
cried out—“Methinks that I understand what 
course the oracle would recommend to us. 
Asopus, they say, had two daughters. Thebe 
and Egina. The god means that, as these two 
were sisters, we ought to ask the Eginetans to 
lend us aid.” As no one was able to hit on any 
better explanation, the Thebans forthwith sent 
messengers to Egina, and, according to the ad¬ 
vice of the oracle, asked their aid, as the people 
“nearest to them.” In answer to this petition 
the Eginetans said that they would give them 
the dEacidae for helpers. 

81. The Thebans now, relying on the as¬ 
sistance of the iEacidae, ventured to renew the 
war; but they met with so rough a reception, 
that they resolved to send to the Eginetans 
again, returning the JEacidx, and beseeching 
them to send some men instead. The Egine¬ 
tans, who were at that time a most flourishing 
people, elated with their greatness, and at the 
same time calling to mind their ancient feud 
with Athens, agreed to lend the Thebans aid, 
and forthwith went to war with the Athenians, 
without even giving them notice by a herald. 
The attention of these latter being engaged by 
the struggle with the Boeotians, the Eginetans 
in their ships of war made descents upon At¬ 
tica, plundered Phalerum, and ravaged a vast 
number of the townships upon the sea-board, 
whereby the Athenians suffered very grievous 
damage. 

82. The ancient feud between the Eginetans 
and Athenians arose out of the following cir¬ 
cumstances. Once upon a time the land of Epi- 
daurus would bear no crops; and the Epidauri- 
ans sent to consult the oracle of Delphi con¬ 
cerning their affliction. The answer bade them 
set up the images of Damia and Auxesia, and 
promised them better fortune when that 
should be done. “Shall the images be made of 




176 HERODOTUS [Book v i| 


bronze or stone?” the Epidaurians asked; but 
the Pythoness replied, “Of neither: but let 
them be made of the garden olive.” Then the 
Epidaurians sent to Athens and asked leave to 
cut olive wood in Attica, believing the Atheni¬ 
an olives to be the holiest; or, according to 
others, because there were no olives at that 
time anywhere else in all the world but at 
Athensd The Athenians answered that they 
would give them leave, but on condition of 
their bringing ofiFerings year by year to Min¬ 
erva Polias and to Erechtheus. The Epidauri¬ 
ans agreed, and having obtained what they 
wanted, made the images of olive wood, and 
set them up in their own country. Henceforth 
their land bore its crops; and they duly paid 
the Athenians what had been agreed upon. 

83. Anciently, and even down to the time 
when this took place, the Eginetans were in 
all things subject to the Epidaurians, and had 
to cross over to Epidaurus for the trial of all 
suits in which they were engaged one with an¬ 
other. After this, however, the Eginetans built 
themselves ships, and, growing proud, re¬ 
volted from the Epidaurians. Having thus 
come to be at enmity with them, the Egine¬ 
tans, who were masters of the sea, ravaged 
Epidaurus, and even carried ofl these very im¬ 
ages of Damia and Auxesia, which they set up 
in their own country, in the interior, at a place 
called CEa, about twenty furlongs from their 
city. This done, they fixed a worship for the 
images, which consisted in part of sacrifices, in 
part of female satiric choruses; while at the 
same time they appointed certain men to fur¬ 
nish the choruses, ten for each goddess. These 
choruses did not abuse men, but only the wom¬ 
en of the country. Holy orgies of a similar 
kind were in use also among the Epidaurians, 
and likewise another sort of holy orgies, 
whereof it is not lawful to speak. 

84. After the robbery of the images the Epi¬ 
daurians ceased to make the stipulated pay¬ 
ments to the Athenians, wherefore the Athen¬ 
ians sent to Epidaurus to remonstrate. But the 
Epidaurians proved to them that they were not 
guilty of any wrong:—“While the images con¬ 
tinued in their country,” they said, “they had 
duly paid the offerings according to the agree¬ 
ment; now that the images had been taken 
from them, they were no longer under any ob¬ 
ligation to pay: the Athenians should make 
their demand of the Eginetans, in whose pos- 

^ This is, of course, not true, for the olive had 
been cultivated in the east from a very remote an¬ 
tiquity. 


session the figures now were.” Upon this the 
Athenians sent to Egina, and demanded the 
images back; but the Eginetans answered that \ 
the Athenians had nothing whatever to do i 
with them. j 

85. After this the Athenians relate that they 
sent a trireme to Egina with certain citizens on * 
board, and that these men, who bore commis- ■ 
sion from the state, landed in Egina, and 
sought to take the images away, considering 1 
them to be their own, inasmuch as they were I 
made of their wood. And first they endeavoured . 
to wrench them from their pedestals, and so car- \ 
ry them off; but failing herein, they in the next || 
place tied ropes to them, and set to work to try ij 
if they could haul them down. In the midst of j 
their hauling suddenly there was a thunder¬ 
clap, and with the thunderclap an earthquake; 
and the crew of the trireme were forthwith 
seized with madness, and, like enemies, began 
to kill one another; until at last there was but 
one left, who returned alone to Phalerum. 

86 . Such is the account given by the Athen- ' 
ians. The Eginetans deny that there was only 

a single vessel:—“Had there been only one,” ' 
they say, “or no more than a few, they would 
easily have repulsed the attack, even if they 
had had no fleet at all; but the Athenians came I 
against them with a large number of ships, 
wherefore they gave way, and did not hazard 
a battle.” They do not however explain clearly 
whether it was from a conviction of their own I 
inferiority at sea that they yielded, or whether . 
it was for the purpose of doing that which in 
fact they did. Their account is that the Athen- ' 
ians, disembarking from their ships, when ' 
they found that no resistance was offered, 
made for the statues, and failing to wrench 1 
them from their pedestals, tied ropes to them 
and began to haul. Then, they say—and some 
people will perhaps believe them, though I 
for my part do not—the two statues, as they 
were being dragged and hauled, fell down I 
both upon their knees; in which attitude they ‘ 
still remain. Such, according to them, was the \ 
conduct of the Athenians; they meanwhile, 
having learnt beforehand what was intended, 
had prevailed on the Argives to hold them¬ 
selves in readiness; and the Athenians accord¬ 
ingly were but just landed on their coasts when 
the Argives came to their aid. Secretly and si¬ 
lently they crossed over from Epidaurus, and, 
before the Athenians were aware, cut off their 
retreat to their ships, and fell upon them; and ' 
the thunder came exactly at that moment, and ' 
the earthquake with it. 





83 - 91 ] the history 177 


87. The Argives and the Eginetans both 
agree in giving this account; and the Atheni¬ 
ans themselves acknowledge that but one of 
their men returned alive to Attica. According 
to the Argives, he escaped from the battle in 
which the rest of the Athenian troops were 
destroyed by them. According to the Atheni¬ 
ans, it was the god who destroyed their troops; 
and even this one man did not escape, for he 
perished in the following manner. When he 
came back to Athens, bringing word of the 
calamity, the wives of those who had been sent 
out on the expedition took it sorely to heart 
that he alone should have survived the slaught¬ 
er of all the rest;—they therefore crowded 
round the man, and struck him with the 
brooches by which their dresses were fastened 
—each, as she struck, asking him where he 
had left her husband. And the man died in 
this way. The Athenians thought the deed of 
the women more horrible even than the fate of 
the troops; as however they did not know how 
else to punish them, they changed their dress 
and compelled them to wear the costume of 
the lonians. Till this time the Athenian wom¬ 
en had worn a Dorian dress, shaped nearly 
like that which prevails at Corinth. Hence¬ 
forth they were made to wear the linen tunic, 
which does not require brooches. 

88. In very truth, however, this dress is not 
originally Ionian, but Carian; for anciently the 
Greek women all wore the costume which is 
now called the Dorian. It is said further that 
the Argives and Eginetans made it a custom, 
on this same account, for their women to wear 
brooches half as large again as formerly, and to 
offer brooches rather than anything else in the 
temple of these goddesses. They also forbade 
the bringing of anything Attic into the temple, 
were it even a jar of earthenware, and made 
a law that none but native drinking vessels 
should be used there in time to come. From 
this early age to my own day the Argive and 
Eginetan women have always continued to 
wear their brooches larger than formerly, 
through hatred of the Athenians. 

89. Such then was the origin of the feud 
which existed between the Eginetans and the 
Athenians. Hence, when the Thebans made 
their application for succour, the Eginetans, 
calling to mind the matter of images, gladly 
lent their aid to the Boeotians. They ravaged 
all the sea-coast of Attica; and the Athenians 
were about to attack them in return, when 
they were stopped by the oracle of Delphi, 
which bade them wait till thirty years had 


passed from the time that the Eginetans did 
the wrong, and in the thirty-first year, having 
first set apart a precinct for ^Eacus, then to be¬ 
gin the war. “So should they succeed to their 
wish,” the oracle said; “but if they went to 
war at once, though they would still conquer 
the island in the end, yet they must go through 
much suffering and much exertion before tak¬ 
ing it.” On receiving this warning the Athen¬ 
ians set apart a precinct for ^Eacus—the same 
which still remains dedicated to him in their 
market-place—but they could not hear with 
any patience of waiting thirty years, after they 
had suffered such grievous wrong at the hands 
of the Eginetans. 

90. Accordingly they were making ready to 
take their revenge when a fresh stir on the 
part of the Lacedaemonians hindered their 
projects. These last had become aware of the 
truth—how that the Alcmaeonidae had prac¬ 
tised on the Pythoness, and the Pythoness had 
schemed against themselves, and against the 
Pisistratidae; and the discovery was a double 
grief to them, for while they had driven their 
own sworn friends into exile, they found that 
they had not gained thereby a particle of good 
will from Athens. They were also moved by 
certain prophecies, which declared that many 
dire calamities should befall them at the hands 
of the Athenians. Of these in times past they 
had been ignorant; but now they had become 
acquainted with them by means of Cleomenes, 
who had brought them with him to Sparta, 
having found them in the Athenian citadel, 
where they had been left by the Pisistratidae 
when they were driven from Athens: they 
were in the temple, and Cleomenes having dis¬ 
covered them, carried them off. 

91. So when the Lacedaemonians obtained 
possession of the prophecies, and saw that the 
Athenians were growing in strength, and had 
no mind to acknowledge any subjection to 
their control, it occurred to them that, if the 
people of Attica were free, they would be like¬ 
ly to be as powerful as themselves, but if they 
were oppressed by a tyranny, they would be 
weak and submissive. Under this feeling they 
sent and recalled Hippias, the son of Pisistra- 
tus, from Sigeum upon the Hellespont, where 
the Pisistratidae had taken shelter. Hippias 
came at their bidding, and the Spartans on his 
arrival summoned deputies from all their other 
allies, and thus addressed the assembly:— 

“Friends and brothers in arms, we are free 
to confess that we did lately a thing which was 
not right. Misled by counterfeit oracles, we 



178 HERODOTUS [Book v 


drove from their country those who were our 
sworn and true friends, and who had, more¬ 
over, engaged to keep Athens in dependence 
upon us; and we delivered the government 
into the hands of an unthankful people—a 
people who no sooner got their freedom by 
our means, and grew in power, than they 
turned us and our king, with every token of 
insult, out of their city. Since then they have 
gone on continually raising their thoughts 
higher, as their neighbours of Boeotia and 
Chalcis have already discovered to their cost, 
and as others too will presently discover if they 
shall oEend them. Having thus erred, we will 
endeavour now, with your help, to remedy the 
evils we have caused, and to obtain vengeance 
on the Athenians. For this cause we have sent 
for Hippias to come here, and have summoned 
you likewise from your several states, that we 
may all now with heart and hand unite to re¬ 
store him to Athens, and thereby give him 
back that which we took from him formerly.” 

92. (§ I.) Such was the address of the 
Spartans. The greater number of the allies lis¬ 
tened without being persuaded. None however 
broke silence but Sosicles the Corinthian, who 
exclaimed— 

“Surely the heaven will soon be below, and 
the earth above, and men will henceforth live 
in the sea, and fish take their place upon the dry 
land, since you, Lacedaemonians, propose to 
put down free governments in the cities of 
Greece, and to set up tyrannies in their room. 
There is nothing in the whole world so unjust, 
nothing so bloody, as a tyranny. If, however, 
it seems to you a desirable thing to have the 
cities under despotic rule, begin by putting a 
tyrant over yourselves, and then establish des¬ 
pots in the other states. While you continue 
yourselves, as you have always been, unac¬ 
quainted with tyranny, and take such excellent 
care that Sparta may not suffer from it, to act 
as you are now doing is to treat your allies un¬ 
worthily. If you knew what tyranny was as 
well as ourselves, you would be better advised 
than you now are in regard to it. (§ 2.) The 
government at Corinth was once an oligarchy 
—a single race, called Bacchiada,*, who inter¬ 
married only among themselves, held the man¬ 
agement of affairs. Now it happened that Am- 
phion, one of these, had a daughter, named 
Labda, who was lame, and whom therefore 
none of the Bacchiadae would consent to mar¬ 
ry; so she was taken to wife by Action, son of 
Echecrates, a man of the township of Petra, 
who was, however, by descent of the race of 


the Lapithae, and of the house of Caeneus. Ac¬ 
tion, as he had no child, either by this wife or 
by any other, went to Delphi to consult the 
oracle concerning the matter. Scarcely had he 
entered the temple when the Pythoness saluted 
him in these words— 

No one honours thee now, Aetion, worthy of hon¬ 
our — 

Labda shall soon be a mother—her offspring a 
rock^, that will one day 

Fall on the kjngly race, and right the city of Cor¬ 
inth. 

By some chance this address of the oracle to 
Aetion came to the ears of the Bacchiadae, who 
till then had been unable to perceive the mean¬ 
ing of another earlier prophecy which likewise 
bore upon Corinth, and pointed to the same 
event as Action’s prediction. It was the follow¬ 
ing:— 

When mid the rochj an eagle shall bear a carnivo¬ 
rous lion, 

Mighty and fierce, he shall loosen the limbs of 
many beneath them — 

Brood ye well upon this, all ye Corinthian people. 
Ye who dwell by fair Peirene, and beetling Co¬ 
rinth. 

(§ 3.) The Bacchiadae had possessed this ora¬ 
cle for some time; but they were quite at a loss 
to know what it meant until they heard the 
response given to Aetion; then however they 
at once perceived its meaning, since the two 
agreed so well together. Nevertheless, though 
the bearing of the first prophecy was now 
clear to them, they remained quiet, being 
minded to put to death the child which Ac¬ 
tion was expecting. As soon, therefore, as his 
wife was delivered, they sent ten of their num¬ 
ber to the township where Aetion lived, with 
orders to make away with the baby. So the 
men came to Petra, and went into Action’s 
house, and there asked if they might see the 
child; and Labda, who knew nothing of their 
purpose, but thought their inquiries arose 
from a kindly feeling towards her husband, 
brought the child, and laid him in the arms of 
one of them. Now they had agreed by the way 
that whoever first got hold of the child should 
dash it against the ground. It happened, 
however, by a providential chance, that the 
babe, just as Labda put him into the man’s 
arms, smiled in his face. The man saw the 
smile, and was touched with pity, so that he 
could not kill it; he therefore passed it on to 
his next neighbour, who gave it to a third; and 
so it went through all the ten without any one 
choosing to be the murderer. The mother re- 



92 ] THE HISTORY 179 


ceived her child back; and the men went out 
of the house, and stood near the door, and 
there blamed and reproached one another; 
chiefly however accusing the man who had 
first had the child in his arms, because he had 
not done as had been agreed upon. At last, 
after much time had been thus spent, they re¬ 
solved to go into the house again and all take 
part in the murder. (§ 4.) But it was fated that 
evil should come upon Corinth from the prog¬ 
eny of Action; and so it chanced that Labda, 
as she stood near the door, heard all that the 
men said to one another, and fearful of their 
changing their mind, and returning to destroy 
her baby, she carried him off and hid him in 
what seemed to her the most unlikely place to 
be suspected, viz., a ‘cypsel’ or corn-bin. She 
knew that if they came back to look for the 
child, they would search all her house; and so 
indeed they did, but not finding the child af¬ 
ter looking everywhere, they thought it best 
to go away, and declare to those by whom they 
had been sent that they had done their bid¬ 
ding. And thus they reported on their return 
home. (§ 5.) Action’s son grew up, and, in re¬ 
membrance of the danger from which he had 
escaped, was named Cypselus, after the corn- 
bin. When he reached to man’s estate, he went 
to Delphi, and on consulting the oracle, re¬ 
ceived a response which was two-sided. It was 
the following:— 

See there comes to my dwelling a man much fa¬ 
voured of fortune, 

• Cypselus, son of Aetion, and hjng of the glorious 
Corinth — 

He and his children too, but not his chtldreids 
children. 

Such was the oracle; and Cypselus put so much 
faith in it that he forthwith made his attempt, 
and thereby became master of Corinth. Hav¬ 
ing thus got the tyranny, he showed himself a 
harsh ruler—many of the Corinthians he drove 
into banishment, many he deprived of their 
fortunes, and a still greater number of their 
lives. (§ 6.) His reign lasted thirty years, and 
was prosperous to its close; insomuch that he 
left the government to Periander, his son. This 
prince at the beginning of his reign was of a 
milder temper than his father; but after he cor¬ 
responded by means of messengers with 
Thrasybulus, tyrant of Miletus, he became 
even more sanguinary. On one occasion he 
sent a herald to ask Thrasybulus what mode 
of government it was safest to set up in order 
to rule with honour. Thrasybulus led the mes¬ 
senger without the city, and took him into a 


field of corn, through which he began to walk, 
while he asked him again and again concern¬ 
ing his coming from Corinth, ever as he went 
breaking off and throwing away all such ears 
of corn as over-topped the rest. In this way he 
went through the whole field, and destroyed 
all the best and richest part of the crop; then, 
without a word, he sent the messenger back. 
On the return of the man to Corinth, Perian¬ 
der was eager to know what Thrasybulus had 
counselled, but the messenger reported that he 
had said nothing; and he wondered that Peri¬ 
ander had sent him to so strange a man, who 
seemed to have lost his senses, since he did 
nothing but destroy his own property. And 
upon this he told how Thrasybulus had be¬ 
haved at the interview. (§7.) Periander, per¬ 
ceiving what the action meant, and knowing 
that Thrasybulus advised the destruction of all 
the leading citizens, treated his subjects from 
this time forward with the very greatest cru¬ 
elty. Where Cypselus had spared any, and had 
neither put them to death nor banished them, 
Periander completed what his father had left 
unfinished. One day he stripped all the women 
of Corinth stark naked, for the sake of his 
own wife Melissa. He had sent messengers into 
Thesprotia to consult the oracle of the dead 
upon the Acheron concerning a pledge v/hich 
had been given into his charge by a stranger, 
and Melissa appeared, but refused to speak or 
tell where the pledge was—‘she was chill,’ she 
said, ‘having no clothes; the garments buried 
with her were of no manner of use, since they 
had not been burnt. And this should be her 
token to Periander, that what she said was true 
—the oven was cold when he baked his loaves 
in it.’ When this message was brought him. 
Periander knew the token; wherefore he 
straightway made proclamation, that all the 
wives of the Corinthians should go forth to the 
temple of Juno. So the women apparelled 
themselves in their bravest, and went forth, as 
if to a festival. Then, with the help of his 
guards, whom he had placed for the purpose, 
he stripped them one and all, making no dif¬ 
ference between the free women and the 
slaves; and, taking their clothes to a pit, he 
called on the name of Melissa, and burnt the 
whole heap. This done, he sent a second time 
to the oracle; and Melissa’s ghost told him 
where he would find the stranger’s pledge. 
Such, O Laceda!monians! is tyranny, and such 
are the deeds which spring from it. We Corin¬ 
thians marvelled greatly when we first knew 
of your having sent for Hippias; and now it 



180 HERODOTUS [Book v 


surprises us still more to hear you speak as you 
do. We adjure you, by the common gods of 
Greece, plant not despots in her cities. If how¬ 
ever you are determined, if you persist, against 
all justice, in seeking to restore Hippias— 
know, at least, that the Corinthians will not 
approve your conduct.” 

93. When Sosicles, the deputy from Cor¬ 
inth, had thus spoken, Hippias replied, and, 
invoking the same gods, he said—‘‘Of a surety 
the Corinthians will, beyond all others, regret 
the Pisistratidae, when the fated days come for 
them to be distressed by the Athenians.” Hip¬ 
pias spoke thus because he knew the prophe¬ 
cies better than any man living. But the rest of 
the allies, who till Sosicles spoke had remained 
quiet, when they heard him utter his thoughts 
thus boldly, all together broke silence, and 
declared themselves of the same mind; and 
withal, they conjured the Lacedaemonians “not 
to revolutionise a Grecian city.” And in this 
way the enterprise came to nought. 

94. Hippias hereupon withdrew; and Am- 
yntas the Macedonian offered him the city of 
Anthemus, while the Thessalians were willing 
to give him lolcos: but he would accept neither 
the one nor the other, preferring to go back to 
Sigeum, which city Pisistratus had taken by 
force of arms from the Mytilenaeans. Pisistra¬ 
tus, when he became master of the place, es¬ 
tablished there as tyrant his own natural son, 
Hegesistratus, whose mother was an Argive 
woman. But this prince was not allowed to en¬ 
joy peaceably what his father had made over 
to him; for during very many years there had 
been war between the Athenians of Sigeum 
and the Mytilenaeans of the city called Achil- 
leum. They of Mytilene insisted on having the 
place restored to them: but the Athenians re¬ 
fused, since they argued that the iEolians had 
no better claim to the Trojan territory than 
themselves, or than any of the other Greeks 
who helped Menelaiis on occasion of the rape 
of Helen. 

95. War accordingly continued, with many 
and various incidents, whereof the following 
was one. In a battle which was gained by the 
Athenians, the poet Alcaeus took to flight, and 
saved himself, but lost his arms, which fell into 
the hands of the conquerors. They hung them 
up in the temple of Minerva at Sigeum; and 
Alcaeus made a poem, describing his misadven¬ 
ture to his friend Melanippus, and sent it to 
him at Mytilene. The Mytilenaeans and Athen¬ 
ians were reconciled by Periander, the son of 
Cypselus, who was chosen by both parties as 


arbiter—he decided that they should each re¬ 
tain that of which they were at the time pos¬ 
sessed; and Sigeum passed in this way under 
the dominion of Athens. 

96. On the return of Hippias to Asia from 
Lacedaemon, he moved heaven and earth to 
set Artaphernes against the Athenians, and 
did all that lay in his power to bring Athens 
into subjection to himself and Darius. So when 
the Athenians learnt what he was about, they 
sent envoys to Sardis, and exhorted the Per¬ 
sians not to lend an ear to the Athenian exiles. 
Artaphernes told them in reply, “that if they 
wished to remain safe, they must receive back 
Hippias.” The Athenians, when this answer 
was reported to them, determined not to con¬ 
sent, and therefore made up their minds to be 
at open enmity with the Persians. 

97. The Athenians had come to this deci¬ 
sion, and were already in bad odour with the 
Persians, when Aristagoras the Milesian, dis¬ 
missed from Sparta by Cleomenes the Lacedae¬ 
monian, arrived at Athens. He knew that, 
after Sparta, Athens was the most powerful of 
the Grecian states. Accordingly he appeared 
before the people, and, as he had done at Spar¬ 
ta, spoke to them of the good things which 
there were in Asia, and of the Persian mode of 
fight—how they used neither shield nor spear, 
and were very easy to conquer. All this he 
urged, and reminded them also that Miletus 
was a colony from Athens, and therefore ought 
to receive their succour, since they were so 
powerful—and in the earnestness of his en¬ 
treaties, he cared little what he promised—till, 
at the last, he prevailed and won them over. It 
seems indeed to be easier to deceive a multi¬ 
tude than one man—for Aristagoras, though 
he failed to impose on Cleomenes the Lacedae¬ 
monian, succeeded with the Athenians, who 
were thirty thousand. Won by his persuasions, 
they voted that twenty ships should be sent to 
the aid of the lonians, under the command of 
Melanthius, one of the citizens, a man of mark 
in every way. These ships were the beginning 
of mischief both to the Greeks and to the bar¬ 
barians. 

98. Aristagoras sailed away in advance, and 
when he reached Miletus, devised a plan, from 
which no manner of advantage could possibly 
accrue to the lonians;—indeed, in forming it, 
he did not aim at their benefit, but his sole 
wish was to annoy King Darius. He sent a 
messenger into Phrygia to those Paeonians who 
had been led away captive by Megabazus from 
the river Strymon, and who now dwelt by 



93 - 103 ] the history 181 


themselves in Phrygia, having a tract of land 
and a hamlet of their own. This man, when 
he reached the Paeonians, spoke thus to 
them:— 

“Men of Paeonia, Aristagoras, king of Mile¬ 
tus, has sent me to you, to inform you that you 
may now escape, if you choose to follow the 
advice he proffers. All Ionia has revolted from 
the king; and the way is open to you to return 
to your own land. You have only to contrive 
to reach the sea-coast; the rest shall be our busi- 
ness. 

When the Paeonians heard this, they were 
exceedingly rejoiced, and, taking with them 
their wives and children, they made all speed 
to the coast; a few only remaining in Phrygia 
through fear. The rest, having reached the sea, 
crossed over to Chios, where they had just 
landed, when a great troop of Persian horse 
came following upon their heels, and seeking 
to overtake them. Not succeeding, however, 
they sent a message across to Chios, and 
begged the Paeonians to come back again. 
These last refused, and were conveyed by the 
Chians from Chios to Lesbos, and by the Les¬ 
bians thence to Doriscus; from which place 
they made their way on foot to Paeonia. 

99. The Athenians now arrived with a fleet 
of twenty sail, and brought also in their com¬ 
pany five triremes of the Eretrians; which had 
joined the expedition, not so much out of 
goodwill towards Athens, as to pay a debt 
which they already owed to the people of Mile¬ 
tus. For in the old war between the Chalcide- 
ans and Eretrians, the Milesians fought on the 
Eretrian side throughout, while the Chalcide- 
ans had the help of the Samian people. Aris¬ 
tagoras, on their arrival, assembled the rest of 
his allies, and proceeded to attack Sardis, not 
however leading the army in person, but ap¬ 
pointing to the command his own brother 
Charopinus and Hermophantus, one of the 
citizens, while he himself remained behind in 
Miletus. 

100. The lonians sailed with this fleet to 
Ephesus, and, leaving their ships at Coressus 
in the Ephesian territory, took guides from the 
city, and went up the country with a great 
host. They marched along the course of the 
river Cayster, and, crossing over the ridge of 
Tmolus, came down upon Sardis and took it, 
no man opposing them;—the whole city fell 
into their hands, except only the citadel, which 
Artaphernes defended in person, having with 
him no contemptible force. 

101. Though, however, they took the city. 


they did not succeed in plundering it; for, as 
the houses in Sardis were most of them built 
of reeds, and even the few which were of brick 
had a reed thatching for their roof, one of 
them was no sooner fired by a soldier than the 
flames ran speedily from house to house, and 
spread over the whole place. As the fire raged, 
the Lydians and such Persians as were in the 
city, inclosed on every side by the flames, 
which had seized all the skirts of the town, 
and finding themselves unable to get out, came 
in crowds into the market-place, and gathered 
themselves upon the banks of the Pactolus. 
This stream, which comes down from Mount 
Tmolus, and brings the Sardians a quantity of 
gold-dust, runs directly through the market 
place of Sardis, and joins the Hermus, before 
that river reaches the sea. So the Lydians and 
Persians, brought together in this way in the 
market-place and about the Pactolus, were 
forced to stand on their defence; and the loni¬ 
ans, when they saw the enemy in part resist¬ 
ing, in part pouring towards them in dense 
crowds, took fright, and drawing off to the 
ridge which is called Tmolus, when night 
came, went back to their ships. 

102. Sardis however was burnt, and, among 
other buildings, a temple of the native god¬ 
dess Cybele was destroyed; which was the rea¬ 
son afterwards alleged by the Persians for set¬ 
ting on fire the temples of the Greeks. As soon 
as what had happened was known, all the 
Persians who were stationed on this side the 
Halys drew together, and brought help to the 
Lydians. Finding however, when they arrived, 
that the lonians had already withdrawn from 
Sardis, they set off, and, following close upon 
their track, came up with them at Ephesus. 
The lonians drew out against them in battle 
array; and a fight ensued, wherein the Greeks 
had very greatly the worse. Vast numbers were 
slain by the Persians: among other men of 
note, they killed the captain of the Eretrians, 
a certain Eualcidas, a man who had gained 
crowns at the Games, and received much praise 
from Simonides the Cean. Such as made their 
escape from the battle, dispersed among the 
several cities. 

103. So ended this encounter. Afterwards 
the Athenians quite forsook the lonians, and, 
though Aristagoras besought them much by 
his ambassadors, refused to give him any furth¬ 
er help. Still the lonians, notwithstanding this 
desertion, continued unceasingly their prepa¬ 
rations to carry on the war against the Persian 
king, which their late conduct towards him 


182 HERODOTUS IBook v 


had rendered unavoidable. Sailing into the 
Hellespont, they brought Byzantium, and all 
the other cities in that quarter, under their 
sway. Again, quitting the Hellespont, they 
went to Caria, and won the greater part of the 
Carians to their side; while Caunus, which 
had formerly refused to join with them, after 
the burning of Sardis, came over likewise. 

104. All the Cyprians too, excepting those of 
Amathus, of their own proper motion es¬ 
poused the Ionian cause. The occasion of their 
revolting from the Medes was the following. 
There was a certain Onesilus, younger brother 
of Gorgus, king of Salamis, and son of Chersis, 
who was son of Siromus, and grandson of 
Evelthon. This man had often in former times 
entreated Gorgus to rebel against the king; 
but, when he heard of the revolt of the lonians, 
he left him no peace with his importunity. 
As, however, Gorgus would not hearken to 
him, he watched his occasion, and when his 
brother had gone outside the town, he with 
his partisans closed the gates upon him. Gor¬ 
gus, thus deprived of his city, fled to the 
Medes; and Onesilus, being now king of Sala¬ 
mis, sought to bring about a revolt of the 
whole of Cyprus. All were prevailed on except 
the Amathusians, who refused to listen to him; 
whereupon Onesilus sate down before Ama¬ 
thus, and laid siege to it. 

105. While Onesilus was engaged in the 
siege of Amathus, King Darius received tid¬ 
ings of the taking and burning of Sardis by the 
Athenians and lonians; and at the same time 
he learnt that the author of the league, the 
man by whom the whole matter had been 
planned and contrived, was Aristagoras the 
Milesian. It is said that he no sooner under¬ 
stood what had happened, than, laying aside 
all thought concerning the lonians, who 
would, he was sure, pay dear for their rebel¬ 
lion, he asked, “Who the Athenians were.^” 
and, being informed, called for his bow, and 
placing an arrow on the string, shot upward 
into the sky, saying, as he let fly the shaft— 
“Grant me, Jupiter, to revenge myself on the 
Athenians!” After this speech, he bade one of 
his servants every day, when his dinner was 
spread, three times repeat these words to 
him—“Master, remember the Athenians.” 

106. Then he summoned into his presence 
Histiaeus of Miletus, whom he had kept at his 
court for so long a time; and on his appearance 
addressed him thus—“I am told, O Histiaeus, 
that thy lieutenant, to whom thou hast given 
Miletus in charge, has raised a rebellion against 


me. He has brought men from the other conti¬ 
nent to contend with me, and, prevailing on j 
the lonians—whose conduct I shall know how } 
to recompense—to join with this force, he has | 
robbed me of Sardis! Is this as it should be, 
thinkest thou.^ Or can it have been done with¬ 
out thy knowledge and advice.^ Beware lest it 
be found hereafter that the blame of these acts 
is thine.” 

Histiaeus answered—“What words are these, 

O king, to which thou hast given utterance.^ I 
advise aught from which unpleasantness of 
any kind, little or great, should come to thee! 
What could I gain by so doingOr what is 
there that I lack now.^ Have I not all that thou 
hast, and am I not thought worthy to partake 
all thy counsels? If my lieutenant has indeed 
done as thou sayest, be sure he has done it all 
of his own head. For my part, I do not think I 
it can really be that the Milesians and my lieu¬ 
tenant have raised a rebellion against thee. But 
if they have indeed committed aught to thy 
hurt, and the tidings are true which have come 
to thee, judge thou how ill-advised thou wert 
to remove me from the sea-coast. The lonians, 
it seems, have waited till I was no longer in 
sight, and then sought to execute that which 
they long ago desired; whereas, if I had been 
there, not a single city would have stirred. 
Suffer me then to hasten at my best speed to 
Ionia, that I may place matters there upon 
their former footing, and deliver up to thee the 
deputy of Miletus, who has caused all the 
troubles. Having managed this business to thy 
heart’s content, I swear by all the gods of thy 
royal house, I will not put off the clothes in 
which I reach Ionia till I have made Sardinia, 
the biggest island in the world, thy tributary.” 

107. Histiaeus spoke thus, wishing to de¬ 
ceive the king; and Darius, persuaded by his 
words, let him go; only bidding him be sure 
to do as he had promised, and afterwards 
come back to Susa. 

108. In the meantime—while the tidings of 
the burning of Sardis were reaching the king, 
and Darius was shooting the arrow and hav¬ 
ing the conference with Histiaeus, and the lat¬ 
ter, by permission of Darius, was hastening 
down to the sea—in Cyprus the following 
events took place. Tidings came to Onesilus, 
the Salaminian, who was still besieging Ama¬ 
thus, that a certain Artybius, a Persian, was 
looked for to arrive in Cyprus with a great 
Persian armament. So Onesilus, when the 
news reached him, sent off heralds to all parts 
of Ionia, and besought the lonians to give him 






I04-II4] THE HISTORY 183 


aid. After brief deliberation, these last in full 
force passed over into the island; and the Per¬ 
sians about the same time crossed in their ships 
from Cilicia, and proceeded by land to attack 
Salamis; while the Phoenicians, with the fleet, 
sailed round the promontory which goes by the 
name of “the Keys of Cyprus.’’ 

109. In this posture of affairs the princes of 
Cyprus called together the captains of the loni- 
ans, and thus addressed them:— 

“Men of Ionia, we Cyprians leave it to you 
to choose whether you will fight with the Per¬ 
sians or with the Phoenicians. If it be your 
pleasure to try your strength on land against 
the Persians, come on short at once, and array 
yourselves for the battle; we will then embark 
aboard your ships and engage the Phoenicians 
by sea. If, on the other hand, ye prefer to en¬ 
counter the Phoenicians, let that be your task: 
only be sure, whichever part you choose, to ac¬ 
quit yourselves so that Ionia and Cyprus, so far 
as depends on you, may preserve their free¬ 
dom.” 

The lonians made answer—“The common¬ 
wealth of Ionia sent us here to guard the sea, 
not to make over our ships to you, and engage 
with the Persians on shore. We will therefore 
keep the post which has been assigned to us, 
and seek therein to be of some service. Do you, 
remembering what you suffered when you 
were the slaves of the Medes, behave like brave 
warriors.” 

no. Such was the reply of the lonians. Not 
long afterwards the Persians advanced into the 
plain before Salamis, and the Cyprian kings 
ranged their troops in order of battle against 
them, placing them so that while the rest of 
the Cyprians were drawn up against the auxil¬ 
iaries of the enerhy, the choicest troops of the 
Salaminians and the Solians were set to oppose 
the Persians. At the same time Onesilus, of his 
own accord, took post opposite to Artybius, 
the Persian general. 

III. Now Artybius rode a horse which had 
been trained to rear up against a foot-soldier. 
Onesilus, informed of this, called to him his 
shieldbearer, who was a Carian by nation, a 
man well skilled in war, and of daring cour¬ 
age; and thus addressed him:—“I hear,” he 
said, “that the horse which Artybius rides, 
rears up and attacks with his fore legs and teeth 
the man against whom his rider urges him. 
Consider quickly therefore and tell me which 
wilt thou undertake to encounter, the steed or 
the riderThen the squire answered him, 
“Both, my liege, or either, am I ready to un¬ 


dertake, and there is nothing that I will shrink 
from at thy bidding. But I will tell thee what 
seems to me to make most for thy interests. As 
thou art a prince and a general, I think thou 
shouldest engage with one who is himself both 
a prince and also a general. For then, if thou 
slayest thine adversary, ’twill redound to thine 
honour, and if he slays thee (which may 
Heaven forefend!), yet to fall by the hand of a 
worthy foe makes death lose half its horror. 
To us, thy followers, leave his war-horse and 
his retinue. And have thou no fear of the 
horse’s tricks. I warrant that this is the last 
time he will stand up against any one.” 

112. Thus spake the Carian; and shortly 
after, the two hosts joined battle both by sea 
and land. And here it chanced that by sea the 
lonians, who that day fought as they have never 
done either before or since, defeated the Phoe¬ 
nicians, the Samians especially distinguishing 
themselves. Meanwhile the combat had begun 
on land, and the two armies were engaged in 
a sharp struggle, when thus it fell out in the 
matter of the generals. Artybius, astride upon 
his horse, charged down upon Onesilus, who, 
as he had agreed with his shieldbearer, aimed 
his blow at the rider; the horse reared and 
placed his fore feet upon the shield of Onesi¬ 
lus, when the Carian cut at him with a reap¬ 
ing-hook, and severed the two legs from the 
body. The horse fell upon the spot, and Arty¬ 
bius, the Persian general, with him. 

113. In the thick of the fight, Stesanor, ty¬ 
rant of Curium, who commanded no incon¬ 
siderable body of troops, went over with them 
to the enemy. On this desertion of the Curians 
—Argive colonists, if report says true—forth¬ 
with the war-chariots of the Salaminians fol¬ 
lowed the example set them, and went over 
likewise; whereupon victory declared in fa¬ 
vour of the Persians; and the army of the Cy¬ 
prians being routed, vast numbers were slain, 
and among them Onesilus, the son of Chersis, 
who was the author of the revolt, and Aris- 
tocyprus, king of the Solians. This Aristocy- 
prus was son of Philocyprus, whom Solon the 
Athenian, when he visited Cyprus, praised in 
his poems beyond all other sovereigns. 

114. The Amathusians, because Onesilus 
had laid siege to their town, cut the head off 
his corpse, and took it with them to Amathus, 
where it was set up over the gates. Here it 
hung till it became hollow; whereupon a 
swarm of bees took possession of it, and filled 
it with a honeycomb. On seeing this the Ama¬ 
thusians consulted the oracle, and were com- 


184 HERODOTUS [Book v 


manded “to take down the head and bury it, 
and thenceforth to regard Onesilus as a hero, 
and offer sacrifice to him year by year; so it 
would go the better with them.” And to this day 
the Amathusians do as they were then bidden. 

115. As for the lonians who had gained the 
sea-fight, when they found that the affairs of 
Onesilus were utterly lost and ruined, and that 
siege was laid to all the cities of Cyprus ex¬ 
cepting Salamis, which the inhabitants had 
surrendered to Gorgus, the former king— 
forthwith they left Cyprus, and sailed away 
home. Of the cities which were besieged. Soli 
held out the longest: the Persians took it by 
undermining the wall in the fifth month from 
the beginning of the siege. 

116. Thus, after enjoying a year of freedom, 
the Cyprians were enslaved for the second 
time. Meanwhile Daurises, who was married 
to one of the daughters of Darius, together 
with Hymeas, Otanes, and other Persian cap¬ 
tains, who were likewise married to daughters 
of the king, after pursuing the lonians who 
had fought at Sardis, defeating them, and driv¬ 
ing them to their ships, divided their efforts 
against the different cities, and proceeded in 
succession to take and sack each one of them. 

117. Daurises attacked the towns upon the 
Hellespont, and took in as many days the five 
cities of Dardanus, Abydos, Percote, Lampsa- 
cus, and Paesus. From Paesus he marched 
against Parium; but on his way receiving in¬ 
telligence that the Carians had made common 
cause with the lonians, and thrown off the 
Persian yoke, he turned round, and, leaving 
the Hellespont, marched away towards Caria. 

118. The Carians by some chance got infor¬ 
mation of this movement before Daurises ar¬ 
rived, and drew together their strength to a 
place called “the White Columns,” which is 
on the river Marsyas, a stream running from 
the Idrian country, and emptying itself into 
the Maeander. Here when they were met, 
many plans were put forth; but the best, in my 
judgment, was that of Pixodarus, the son of 
Mausolus, a Cindyan, who was married to a 
daughter of Syennesis, the Cilician king. His 
advice was that the Carians should cross the 
Maeander, and fight with the river at their 
back; that so, all chance of flight being cut off, 
they might be forced to stand their ground, 
and have their natural courage raised to a 
still higher pitch. His opinion, however, did 
not prevail; it was thought best to make the 
enemy have the Maeander behind them; that 
so, if they were defeated in the battle and put 


to flight, they might have no retreat open, but 
be driven headlong into the river. 

119. The Persians soon afterwards ap¬ 
proached, and, crossing the Maeander, engaged 
the Carians upon the banks of the Marsyas; 
where for a long time the battle was stoutly 
contested, but at last the Carians were defeated, 
being overpowered by numbers. On the side 
of the Persians there fell 2000, while the Cari¬ 
ans had not fewer than 10,000 slain. Such as 
escaped from the field of battle collected to¬ 
gether at Labranda, in the vast precinct of 
Jupiter Stratius—a deity worshipped only by 
the Carians—and in the sacred grove of plane- 
trees. Here they deliberated as to the best 
means of saving themselves, doubting whether 
they would fare better if they gave themselves 
up to the Persians, or if they abandoned Asia 
for ever. 

120. As they were debating these matters a 
body of Milesians and allies came to their as¬ 
sistance; whereupon the Carians, dismissing 
their former thoughts, prepared themselves 
afresh for war, and on the approach of the Per¬ 
sians gave them battle a second time. They 
were defeated, however, with still greater loss 
than before; and while all the troops engaged 
suffered severely, the blow fell with most force 
on the Milesians. 

121. The Carians, some while after, re¬ 
paired their ill fortune in another action. Un¬ 
derstanding that the Persians were about to at¬ 
tack their cities, they laid an ambush for them 
on the road which leads to Pedasus; the Per¬ 
sians, who were making a night-march, fell 
into the trap, and the whole army was de¬ 
stroyed, together with the generals, Daurises, 
Amorges, and Sisimaces: Myrsus too, the son 
of Gyges, was killed at the same time. The 
leader of the ambush was Heraclides, the son 
of Ibanolis, a man of Mylasa. Such was the 
way in which these Persians perished. 

122. In the meantime Hymeas, who was 
likewise one of those by whom the lonians 
were pursued after their attack on Sardis, 
directing his course towards the Propontis, 
took Cius, a city of Mysia. Learning, however, 
that Daurises had left the Hellespont, and was 
gone into Caria, he in his turn quitted the Pro¬ 
pontis, and marching with the army under his 
command to the Hellespont, reduced all the 
iEolians of the Troad, and likewise conquered 
the Gergithae, a remnant of the ancient Teu- 
crians. He did not, however, quit the Troad, 
but, after gaining these successes, was himself 
carried off by disease. 



115 - 126 ] THE HISTORY 185 


123. After his death, which happened as I 
have related, Artaphernes, the satrap of Sardis, 
and Otanes, the third general, were directed to 
undertake the conduct of the war against Ionia 
and the neighbouring iEolis. By them Clazo- 
menae in the former, and Cyme in the latter, 
were recovered. 

124. As the cities fell one after another, 
Aristagoras the Milesian (who was in truth, as 
he now plainly showed, a man of but little 
courage), notwithstanding that it was he who 
had caused the disturbances in Ionia and made 
so great a commotion, began, seeing his dan¬ 
ger, to look about for means of escape. Being 
convinced that it was in vain to endeavour to 
overcome King Darius, he called his brothers- 
in-arms together, and laid before them the 
following project:—“ ’Twould be well,” he 
said, “to have some place of refuge, in case they 
were driven out of Miletus. Should he go out 
at the head of a colony to Sardinia, or should 
he sail to Myrcinus in Edonia, which Histiaeus 


had received as a gift from King Darius, and 
had begun to fortify?” 

125. To this question of Aristagoras, Heca- 
tsus, the historian, son of Hegesander, made 
answer that in his judgment neither place was 
suitable. “Aristagoras should build a fort,” he 
said, “in the island of Leros, and, if driven 
from Miletus, should go there and bide his 

• time; from Leros attacks might readily be made, 
and he might re-establish himself in Miletus.” 
Such was the advice given by Hecataeus. 

126. Aristagoras, however, was bent on re¬ 
tiring to Myrcinus. Accordingly, he put the 
government of Miletus into the hands of one 
of the chief citizens, named Pythagoras, and, 
taking with him all who liked to go, sailed to 
Thrace, and there made himself master of the 
place in question. From thence he proceeded to 
attack the Thracians; but here he was cut of? 
with his whole army, while besieging a city 
whose defenders were anxious to accept terms 
of surrender. 
