The Seventh Book, Entitled 
POLYMNIA 




I. Now when tidings of the battle that had 
been fought at Marathon reached the ears of 
King Darius, the son of Hystaspes, his anger 
against the Athenians, which had been al¬ 
ready roused by their attack upon Sardis, 
waxed still fiercer, and he became more than 
ever eager to lead an army against Greece. In¬ 
stantly he sent off messengers to make procla¬ 
mation through the several states that fresh 
levies were to be raised, and these at an in¬ 
creased rate; while ships, horses, provisions, 
and transports were likewise to be furnished. 
So the men published his commands; and now 
all Asia was in commotion by the space of 
three years, while everywhere, as Greece was 
to be attacked, the best and bravest were en¬ 
rolled for the service, and had to make their 
preparations accordingly. 

After this, in the fourth year, the Egyptians 
whom Cambyses had enslaved revolted from 
the Persians; whereupon Darius was more hot 
for war than ever, and earnestly desired to 
march an army against both adversaries. 

2. Now, as he was about to lead forth his 
levies against Egypt and Athens, a fierce con¬ 
tention for the sovereign power arose among 
his sons; since the law of the Persians was that 
a king must not go out with his army, until 
he has appointed one to succeed him upon the 
throne. Darius, before he obtained the king¬ 
dom, had had three sons born to him from his 
former wife, who was a daughter of Gobryas; 
while, since he began to reign, Atossa, the 
daughter of Cyrus, had borne him four. Arta- 
bazanes was the eldest of the first family, and 
Xerxes of the second. These two, therefore, 
being the sons of different mothers, were now 
at variance. Artabazanes claimed the crown as 
the eldest of all the children, because it was an 
established custom all over the world for the 
eldest to have the pre-eminence; while Xerxes, 
on the other hand, urged that he was sprung 


from Atossa, the daughter of Cyrus, and that 1 
it was Cyrus who had won the Persians their 
freedom. ' 

3. Before Darius had pronounced on the 
matter, it happened that Demaratus, the son of 
Ariston, who had been deprived of his crown 
at Sparta, and had afterwards, of his own ac¬ 
cord, gone into banishment, came up to Susa, > 
and there heard of the quarrel of the princes. 1 
Plereupon, as report says, he went to Xerxes, 
and advised him, in addition to all that he had 
urged before, to plead—that at the time when 
he was born Darius was already king, and bore 
rule over the Persians; but when Artabazanes 
came into the world, he was a mere private , 
person. It would therefore be neither right nor 
seemly that the crown should go to another in 
preference to himself. “For at Sparta,” said 
Demaratus, by way of suggestion, “the law is | 
that if a king has sons before he comes to the L 
throne, and another son is born to him after- i 
wards, the child so born is heir to his father s 
kingdom.” Xerxes followed this counsel, and 
Darius, persuaded that he had justice on his 
side, appointed him his successor. For my own 
part I believe that, even without this, the 
crown would have gone to Xerxes; for Atossa 
was all-powerful. 

4. Darius, when he had thus appointed Xer¬ 

xes his heir, was minded to lead forth his ar¬ 
mies; but he was prevented by death while his 
preparations were still proceeding. He died in 
the year following the revolt of Egypt and the 
matters here related, after having reigned in 
all six-and-thirty years, leaving the revolted ! 
Egyptians and the Athenians alike unpun¬ 
ished. At his death the kingdom passed to his 
son Xerxes. ^ 

5. Now Xerxes, on first mounting the ' 
throne, was coldly disposed towards the Gre¬ 
cian war, and made it his business to collect 
an army against Egypt. But Mardonius, the 

214 









THE HISTORY 215 


son of Gobryas, who was at the court, and had 
more influence with him than any of the other 
Persians, being his own cousin, the child of a 
sister of Darius, plied him with discourses like 
the following:— 

“Master, it is not fitting that they of Athens 
escape scot-free, after doing the Persians such 
great injury. Complete the work which thou 
hast now in hand, and then, when the pride of 
Egypt is brought low, lead an army against 
Athens. So shalt thou thyself have good report 
among men, and others shall fear hereafter to 
attack thy country.” 

Thus far it was of vengeance that he spoke; 
but sometimes he would vary the theme, and 
observe by the way, “that Europe was a won¬ 
drous beautiful region, rich in all kinds of cul¬ 
tivated trees, and the soil excellent: no one, 
save the king, was worthy to own such a land.” 

6. All this he said, because he longed for 
adventures, and hoped to become satrap of 
Greece under the king; and after a while he 
had his way, and persuaded Xerxes to do ac¬ 
cording to his desires. Other things, however, 
occurring about the same time, helped his per¬ 
suasions. For, in the first place, it chanced 
that messengers arrived from Thessaly, sent by 
the Aleuadae, Thessalian kings, to invite Xer¬ 
xes into Greece, and to promise him all the as¬ 
sistance which it was in their power to give. 
And further, the Pisistratidae, who had come 
up to Susa, held the same language as the 
Aleuadae, and worked upon him even more 
than they, by means of Onomacritus of Athens, 
an oracle-monger, and the same who set forth 
the prophecies of Musacus in their order. The 
Pisistratidae had previously been at enmity 
with this man, but made up the quarrel before 
they removed to Susa. He was banished from 
Athens by Hipparchus, the son of Pisistratus, 
because he foisted into the writings of Musae- 
us a prophecy that the islands which lie off 
Lemnos would one day disappear in the sea. 
Lasus of Hermione caught him in the act of 
so doing. For this cause Hipparchus banished 
him, though till then they had been the closest 
of friends. Now, however, he went up to Susa 
with the sons of Pisistratus, and they talked 
very grandly of him to the king; while he, for 
his part, whenever he was in the king’s com¬ 
pany, repeated to him certain of the oracles; 
and while he took care to pass over all that 
spoke of disaster to the barbarians, brought 
forward the passages which promised them 
the greatest success. “ ’Twas fated,” he told 
Xerxes, “that a Persian should bridge the Hel¬ 


lespont, and march an army from Asia into 
Greece.” While Onomacritus thus plied Xer¬ 
xes with his oracles, the Pisistratidae and Aleu¬ 
adae did not cease to press on him their advice, 
till at last the king yielded, and agreed to lead 
forth an expedition. 

7. First, however, in the year following the 
death of Darius, he marched against those who 
had revolted from him; and having reduced 
them, and laid all Egypt under a far harder 
yoke than ever his father had put upon it, he 
gave the government to Achaemenes, who was 
his own brother, and son to Darius. This 
Achaemenes was afterwards slain in his gov¬ 
ernment by Inaros, the son of Psammetichus, 
a Libyan. 

8. (§ I.) After Egypt was subdued, Xer¬ 
xes, being about to take in hand the expedition 
against Athens, called together an assembly of 
the noblest Persians to learn their opinions, 
and to lay before them his own designs. So, 
when the men were met, the king spake thus 
to them:— 

“Persians, I shall not be the first to bring in 
among you a new custom—I shall but follow 
one which has come down to us from our fore¬ 
fathers. Never yet, as our old men assure me, 
has our race reposed itself, since the time when 
Cyrus overcame Astyages, and so we Persians 
wrested the sceptre from the Medes. Now in 
all this God guides us; and we, obeying his 
guidance, prosper greatly. What need have I 
to tell you of the deeds of Cyrus and Cam- 
byses, and my own father Darius, how many 
nations they conquered, and added to our do¬ 
minions.^ Ye know right well what great 
things they achieved. But for myself, I will say 
that, from the day on which I mounted the 
throne, I have not ceased to consider by what 
means I may rival those who have preceded 
me in this post of honour, and increase the 
power of Persia as much as any of them. And 
truly I have pondered upon this, until at last 
I have found out a way whereby we may at 
once win glory, and likewise get possession of 
a land which is as large and as rich as our own 
*—nay, which is even more varied in the fruits 
it bears—while at the same time we obtain 
satisfaction and revenge. For this cause I have 
now called you together, that I may make 
known to you what I design to do. (§ 2.) My 
intent is to throw a bridge over the Hellespont 
and march an army through Europe against 
Greece, that thereby I may obtain vengeance 
from the Athenians for the wrongs committed 
by them against the Persians and against my 


216 HERODOTUS [Book vii 


father. Your own eyes saw the preparations of 
Darius against these men; but death came 
upon him, and balked his hopes of revenge. In 
his behalf, therefore, and in behalf of all the 
Persians, I undertake the war, and pledge my¬ 
self not to rest till I have taken and burnt Ath¬ 
ens, which has dared, unprovoked, to injure 
me and my father. Long since they came to 
Asia with Aristagoras of Miletus, who was one 
of our slaves, and, entering Sardis, burnt its 
temples and its sacred groves; again, more 
lately, when we made a landing upon their 
coast under Datis and Artaphernes, how 
roughly they handled us ye do not need to be 
told. (§ 3.) For these reasons, therefore, I am 
bent upon this war; and I see likewise there¬ 
with united no few advantages. Once let us 
subdue this people, and those neighbours of 
theirs who hold the land of Pelops the Phrygi¬ 
an, and we shall extend the Persian territory 
as far as God’s heaven reaches. The sun will 
then shine on no land beyond our borders; for 
I will pass through Europe from one end to the 
other, and with your aid make of all the lands 
which it contains one country. For thus, if 
what I hear be true, affairs stand: the nations 
whereof I have spoken, once swept away, there 
is no city, no country left in all the world, 
which will venture so much as to withstand us 
in arms. By this course then we shall bring all 
mankind under our yoke, alike those who are 
guilty and those who are innocent of doing us 
wrong. (§ 4.) For yourselves, if you wish to 
please me, do as follows: when I announce 
the time for the army to meet together, hasten 
to the muster with a good will, every one of 
you; and know that to the man who brings 
with him the most gallant array I will give the 
gifts which our people consider the most hon¬ 
ourable. This then is what ye have to do. But 
to show that I am not self-willed in this matter, 
I lay the business before you, and give you full 
leave to speak your minds upon it openly.” 

Xerxes, having so spoken, held his peace. 

9. (§ I.) Whereupon Mardonius took the 
word, and said:— 

“Of a truth, my lord, thou dost surpass, not 
only all living Persians, but likewise those yet 
unborn. Most true and right is each word that 
thou hast now uttered; but best of all thy re¬ 
solve not to let the lonians who live in Europe 
—a worthless crew—mock us any more. It were 
indeed a monstrous thing if, after conquering 
and enslaving the Sacae, the Indians, the Ethi¬ 
opians, the Assyrians, and many other mighty 
nations, not for any wrong that they had done 


us, but only to increase our empire, we should 
then allow the Greeks, who have done us such 
wanton injury, to escape our vengeance. What 
is it that we fear in them.^—not surely their 
numbers.^—not the greatness of their wealth.^ 
We know the manner of their battle—we 
know how weak their power is; already have 
we subdued their children who dwell in our 
country, the lonians, Tlolians, and Dorians. I 
myself have had experience of these men when 
I marched against them by the orders of thy 
father; and though I went as far as Macedonia, 
and came but a little short of reaching Athens 
itself, yet not a soul ventured to come out 
against me to battle. (§ 2.) And yet, I am told, 
these very Greeks are wont to wage wars 
against one another in the most foolish 
way, through sheer perversity and doltishness. 
For no sooner is war proclaimed than they 
search out the smoothest and fairest plain that 
is to be found in all the land, and there they 
assemble and fight; whence it comes to pass 
that even the conquerors depart with great 
loss: I say nothing of the conquered, for they 
are destroyed altogether. Now surely, as they 
are all of one speech, they ought to interchange 
heralds and messengers, and make up their 
differences by any means rather than battle; or, 
at the worst, if they must needs fight one 
against another, they ought to post themselves 
as strongly as possible, and so try their quar¬ 
rels. But, notwithstanding that they have so 
foolish a manner of warfare, yet these Greeks, 
when I led my army against them to the very 
borders of Macedonia, did not so much as 
think of offering me battle. (§ 3.) Who then 
will dare, O king! to meet thee in arms, when 
thou comest with all Asia’s warriors at thy 
back, and with all her ships For my part I 
do not believe the Greek people will be so 
foolhardy. Grant, however, that I am mistaken 
herein, and that they are foolish enough to 
meet us in open fight; in that case they will 
learn that there are no such soldiers in the 
whole world as we. Nevertheless let us spare 
no pains; for nothing comes without trouble; 
but all that men acquire is got by painstak- 
mg. 

When Mardonius had in this way softened 
the harsh speech of Xerxes, he too held his 
peace. 

10. [§ I.] The other Persians were silent; all 
feared to raise their voice against the plan pro¬ 
posed to them. But Artabanus, the son of Hys- 
taspes, and uncle of Xerxes, trusting to his rela¬ 
tionship, was bold to speak:—“O king!” he 



»-i0 THE HISTORY 217 


said, “it is impossible, if no more than one opin¬ 
ion is uttered, to make choice of the best: a man 
is forced then to follow whatever advice may 
have been given him; but if opposite speeches 
are delivered, then choice can be exercised. In 
like manner pure gold is not recognised by 
itself; but when we test it along with baser ore, 
we perceive which is the better. I counselled 
thy father, Darius, who was my own brother, 
not to attack the Scyths, a race of people who 
had no town in their whole land. He thought 
however to subdue those wandering tril)es, 
and would not listen to me, but marched an 
army against them, and ere he returned home 
lost many of his bravest warriors. Thou art 
about, O king! to attack a people far superior 
to the Scyths, a people distinguished above oth¬ 
ers both by land and sea. ’Tis fit therefore that 
I should tell thee what danger thou incurrest 
hereby. (§ 2.) Thou sayest that thou wilt 
bridge the Hellespont, and lead thy troops 
through Europe against Greece. Now suppose 
some disaster befall thee by land or sea, or by 
both. It may be even so; for the men are re¬ 
puted valiant. Indeed one may measure their 
prowess from what they have already done; 
for when Datis and Artaphernes led their huge 
army against Attica, the Athenians singly de¬ 
feated them. But grant they are not successful 
on both elements. Still, if they man their ships, 
and, defeating us by sea, sail to the Hellespont, 
and there destroy our bridge—that, sire, were 
a fearful hazard. (§ 3.) And here ’tis not by 
my own mother wit alone that I conjecture 
what will happen; but I remember how nar¬ 
rowly we escaped disaster once, when thy 
father, after throwing bridges over the Thra¬ 
cian Bosphorus and the Ister, marched against 
1 the Scythians, and they tried every sort of 
prayer to induce the lonians, who had charge 
of the bridge over the Ister, to break the pas¬ 
sage. On that day, if Histiaeus, the king of 
Miletus, had sided with the other princes, and 
not set himself to oppose their views, the em¬ 
pire of the Persians would have come to 
nought. Surely a dreadful thing is this even to 
1 hear said, that the king s fortunes depended 
wholly on one man. 

(§ 4.) “Think then no more of incurring so 
great a danger when no need presses, but fol¬ 
low the advice I tender. Break up this meeting, 
and when thou hast well considered the mat¬ 
ter with thyself, and settled what thou wilt do, 
declare to us thy resolve. I know not of aught 
in the world that so profits a man as taking 
good counsel with himself; for even if things 


fall out against one’s hopes, still one has coun¬ 
selled well, though fortune has made the coun¬ 
sel of none effect: whereas if a man counsels 
ill and luck follows, he has gotten a windfall, 
but his counsel is none the less silly. (§ 5.) 
Seest thou how God with his lightning smites 
always the bigger animals, and will not suffer 
them to wax insolent, while those of a lesser 
bulk chafe him not? How likewise his bolts 
fall ever on the highest houses and the tallest 
trees? So plainly does He love to bring down 
everything that exalts itself. Thus ofttimes a 
mighty host is discomfited by a few men, when 
God in his jealousy sends fear or storm from 
heaven, and they perish in a way unworthy of 
them. For God allows no one to have high 
thoughts but Himself. (§ 6.) Again, hurry al¬ 
ways brings about disasters, from which huge 
sufferings are wont to arise; but in delay lie 
many advantages, not apparent (it may be) 
at first sight, but such as in course of time are 
seen of all. Such then is my counsel to thee, O 
king! 

(§ 7.) “And thou, Mardonius, son of Go- 
bryas, forbear to speak foolishly concerning 
the Greeks, who are men that ought not to be 
lightly esteemed by us. For while thou revilest 
the Greeks, thou dost encourage the king to 
lead his own troops against them; and this, as 
it seems to me, is what thou art specially striv¬ 
ing to accomplish. Heaven send thou succeed 
not to thy wish! For slander is of all evils the 
most terrible. In it two men do wrong, and one 
man has wrong done to him. The slanderer 
does wrong, forasmuch as he abuses a man be¬ 
hind his back; and the hearer, forasmuch as he 
believes what he has not searched into thor¬ 
oughly. The man slandered in his absence suf¬ 
fers wrong at the hands of both: for one brings 
against him a false charge; and the other 
thinks him an evildoer. (§ 8.) If, however, it 
must needs be that we go to war with this peo¬ 
ple, at least allow the king to abide at home in 
Persia. Then let thee and me both stake our 
children on the issue, and do thou choose out 
thy men, and, taking with thee whatever num¬ 
ber of troops thou likest, lead forth our armies 
to battle. If things go well for the king, as 
thou sayest they will, let me and my children 
be put to death; but if they fall out as I proph¬ 
esy, let thy children suffer, and thyself too, if 
thou shalt come back alive. But shouldest thou 
refuse this wager, and still resolve to march an 
army against Greece, sure I am that some of 
those whom thou leavest behind thee here will 
one day receive the sad tidings that Mardoni- 






218 HERODOTUS [Book vii 


us has brought a great disaster upon the Per¬ 
sian people, and lies a prey to dogs and birds 
somewhere in the land of the Athenians, or 
else in that of the Lacedaemonians; unless in¬ 
deed thou shalt have perished sooner by the 
way, experiencing in thy own person the 
might of those men on whom thou wouldest 
fain induce the king to make war.” 

11. Thus spake Artabanus. But Xerxes, full 
of wrath, replied to him:— 

“Artabanus, thou art my father’s brother— 
that shall save thee from receiving the due 
meed of thy silly words. One shame however 
I will lay upon thee, coward and faint-hearted 
as thou art—thou shalt not come with me to 
fight these Greeks, but shalt tarry here with 
the women. Without thy aid I will accomplish 
all of which I spake. For let me not be thought 
the child of Darius, the son of Hystaspes, the 
son of Arsames, the son of Ariaramnes, the son 
of Teispes, the son of Cyrus, the son of Cam- 
byses, the son of Teispes, the son of Achae- 
menes, if I take not vengeance on the Atheni¬ 
ans. Full well I know that, were we to remain 
at rest, yet would not they, but would most 
certainly invade our country, if at least it be 
right to judge from what they have already 
done; for, remember, it was they who fired 
Sardis and attacked Asia. So now retreat is on 
both sides impossible, and the choice lies be¬ 
tween doing and suffering injury; either our 
empire must pass under the dominion of the 
Greeks, or their land become the prey of the 
Persians; for there is no middle course left in 
this quarrel. It is right then that we, who have 
in times past received wrong, should now 
avenge it, and that I should thereby discover 
what that great risk is which I run in march¬ 
ing against these men—men whom Pelops the 
Phrygian, a vassal of my forefathers, subdued 
so utterly, that to this day both the land, and 
the people who dwell therein, alike bear the 
name of the conqueror!” 

12. Thus far did the speaking proceed. 
Afterwards evening fell; and Xerxes began to 
find the advice of Artabanus greatly disquiet 
him. So he thought upon it during the night, 
and concluded at last that it was not for his ad¬ 
vantage to lead an army into Greece. When he 
had thus made up his mind anew, he fell 
asleep. And now he saw in the night, as the 
Persians declare, a vision of this nature—he 
thought a tall and beautiful man stood over 
him and said, “Hast thou then changed thy 
mind, Persian, and wilt thou not lead forth 
thy host against the Greeks, after commanding 


the Persians to gather together their levies? 

Be sure thou doest not well to change; nor is ' 
there a man here who will approve thy con¬ 
duct. The course that thou didst determine on 
during the day, let that be followed.” After 
thus speaking the man seemed to Xerxes to fly • 
away. 

13. Day dawned; and the king made no ac¬ 
count of this dream, but called together the 
same Persians as before, and spake to them as 
follows:— 

“Men of Persia, forgive me if I alter the re¬ 
solve to which I came so lately. Consider that 
I have not yet reached to the full growth of my 
wisdom, and that they who urge me to engage 
in this war leave me not to myself for a mo¬ 
ment. When I heard the advice of Artabanus, 
my young blood suddenly boiled; and I spake 
words against him little befitting his years: 
now however I confess my fault, and am re¬ 
solved to follow his counsel. Understand then 
that I have changed my intent with respect to 
carrying war into Greece, and cease to trouble 
yourselves.” 

When they heard these words, the Persians 
were full of joy, and, falling down at the feet 
of Xerxes, made obeisance to him. 

14. But when night came, again the same 
vision stood over Xerxes as he slept, and said, 
“Son of Darius, it seems thou hast openly be¬ 
fore all the Persians renounced the expedition, 
making light of my words, as though thou 
hadst not heard them spoken. Know therefore 
and be well assured, that unless thou go forth 
to the war, this thing shall happen unto thee— 
as thou art grown mighty and puissant in a 
short space, so likewise shalt thou within a lit¬ 
tle time be brought low indeed.” 

15. Then Xerxes, greatly frightened at the 
vision which he had seen, sprang from his 
couch, and sent a messenger to call Artabanus, 
who came at the summons, when Xerxes spoke 
to him in these words:— 

“Artabanus, at the moment I acted foolishly, 
when I gave thee ill words in return for thy 
good advice. However it was not long ere I 
repented, and was convinced that thy counsel 
was such as I ought to follow. But I may not 
now act in this way, greatly as I desire to do 
so. For ever since I repented and changed my 
mind a dream has haunted me, which disap¬ 
proves my intentions, and has now just gone 
from me with threats. Now if this dream is A, 
sent to me from God, and if it is indeed his 
will that our troops should march against : 
Greece, thou too wilt have the same dream 




ii-iS] THE HISTORY 219 


come to thee and receive the same commands 
as myself. And this will be most sure to hap¬ 
pen, I think, if thou puttest on the dress which 
I am wont to wear, and then, after taking thy 
seat upon my throne, liest down to sleep on 
my bed.” 

16. Such were the words of Xerxes. Arta- 
banus would not at first yield to the command 
of the king; for he deemed himself unworthy 
to sit upon the royal throne. At the last how¬ 
ever he was forced to give way, and did as 
Xerxes bade him; but first he spake thus to the 
king [§ I.];— 

“To me, sire, it seems to matter little wheth¬ 
er a man is wise himself or willing to hearken 
to such as give good advice. In thee truly are 
found both tempers; but the counsels of evil 
men lead thee astray: they are like the gales of 
wind which vex the sea—else the most useful 
thing for man in the whole world—and suffer 
it not to follow the bent of its own nature. For 
myself, it irked me not so much to be re¬ 
proached by thee, as to observe that when two 
courses were placed before the Persian people, 
one of a nature to increase their pride, the 
other to humble it, by showing them how hurt¬ 
ful it is to allow one’s heart always to covet 
more than one at present possesses, thou 
madest choice of that which was the worse 
both for thyself and for the Persians. (§ 2.) 
Now thou sayest that from the time when 
thou didst approve the better course, and give 
up the thought of warring against Greece, a 
dream has haunted thee, sent by some god or 
[ other, which will not suffer thee to lay aside 
the expedition. But such things, my son, have 
! of a truth nothing divine in them. The dreams 
I that wander to and fro among mankind, I 
' will tell thee of what nature they are—I who 
1 have seen so many more years than thou. 
I Whatever a man has been thinking of during 
I the day is wont to hover round him in the 
i visions of his dreams at night. Now we during 
I these many days past have had our hands full 
j of this enterprise. (§ 3.) If however the matter 
I be not as I suppose, but God has indeed some 
I part therein, thou hast in brief declared the 
I whole that can be said concerning it—let it 
e’en appear to me as it has to thee, and lay on 
me the same injunctions. But it ought not to 
appear to me any the more if I put on thy 
clothes than if I wear my own, nor if I go to 
sleep in thy bed than if I do so in mine—sup- 
I posing, I mean, that it is about to appear at all. 
; For this thing, be it what it may, that visits 
thee in thy sleep, surely is not so far gone in 


folly as to see me, and because I am dressed in 
thy clothes, straightway to mistake me for 
thee. Now however our business is to see if it 
will regard me as of small account, and not 
vouchsafe to appear to me, whether I wear 
mine own clothes or thine, while it keeps on 
haunting thee continually. If it does so, and 
appears often, I should myself say that it was 
from God. For the rest, if thy mind is fixed, 
and it is not possible to turn thee from thy de¬ 
sign, but I must needs go and sleep in thy bed, 
well and good, let it be even so; and when I 
have done as thou wishest, then let the dream 
appear to me. Till such time, however, I shall 
keep to my former opinion.” 

17. Thus spake Artabanus; and when he 
had so said, thinking to show Xerxes that his 
words were nought, he did according to his 
orders. Flaving put on the garments which 
Xerxes was wont to wear and taken his seat 
upon the royal throne, he lay down to sleep 
upon the king’s own bed. As he slept, there ap¬ 
peared to him the very same dream which had 
been seen by Xerxes; it came and stood over 
Artabanus, and said:— 

“Thou art the man, then, who, feigning to 
be tender of Xerxes, seekest to dissuade him 
from leading his armies against the Greeks! 
But thou shalt not escape scathless, either now 
or in time to come, because thou hast sought 
to prevent that which is fated to happen. As 
for Xerxes, it has been plainly told to himself 
what will befall him, if he refuses to perform 
my bidding.” 

18. In such words, as Artabanus thought, 
the vision threatened him, and then endeav¬ 
oured to burn out his eyes with red-hot irons. 
At this he shrieked, and, leaping from his 
couch, hurried to Xerxes, and, sitting down at 
his side, gave him a full account of the vision; 
after which he went on to speak in the words 
which follow:— 

“I, O King! am a man who have seen many 
mighty empires overthrown by weaker ones: 
and therefore it was that I sought to hinder 
thee from being quite carried away by thy 
youth; since I knew how evil a thing it is to 
covet more than one possesses. I could remem¬ 
ber the expedition of Cyrus against the Mas- 
sagetae, and what was the issue of it; I could 
recollect the march of Cambyses against the 
Ethiops; I had taken part in the attack of Dar¬ 
ius upon the Scyths—bearing therefore all 
these things in mind, I thought with myself 
that if thou shouldst remain at peace, all men 
would deem thee fortunate. But as this im- 



220 HERODOTUS [Book vii 


pulse has plainly come from above, and a 
heaven-sent destruction seems about to over¬ 
take the Greeks, behold, I change to another 
mind, and alter my thoughts upon the matter. 
Do thou therefore make known to the Per¬ 
sians what the god has declared, and bid them 
follow the orders which were first given, and 
prepare their levies. Be careful to act so that 
the bounty of the god may not be hindered by 
slackness on thy part.” 

Thus spake these two together; and Xerxes, 
being in good heart on account of the vision, 
when day broke, laid all before the Persians; 
while Artabanus, who had formerly been the 
only person openly to oppose the expedition, 
now showed as openly that he favoured it. 

19. After Xerxes had thus determined to go 
forth to the war, there appeared to him in his 
sleep yet a third vision. The Magi were con¬ 
sulted upon it, and said that its meaning 
reached to the whole earth, and that all man¬ 
kind would become his servants. Now the 
vision which the king saw was this: he dreamt 
that he was crowned with a branch of an 
olive tree, and that boughs spread out from the 
olive branch and covered the whole earth; then 
suddenly the garland, as it lay upon his brow, 
vanished. So when the Magi had thus inter¬ 
preted the vision, straightway all the Persians 
who were come together departed to their 
several governments, where each displayed the 
greatest zeal, on the faith of the king’s offers. 
For all hoped to obtain for themselves the gifts 
which had been promised. And so Xerxes 
gathered together his host, ransacking every 
corner of the continent. 

20. Reckoning from the recovery of Egypt, 
Xerxes spent four full years in collecting his 
host, and making ready all things that were 
needful for his soldiers. It was not till the close 
of the fifth year that he set forth on his march, 
accompanied by a mighty multitude. For of 
all the armaments whereof any mention has 
reached us, this was by far the greatest; inso¬ 
much that no other expedition compared to 
this seems of any account, neither that which 
Darius undertook against the Scythians, nor 
the expedition of the Scythians (which the 
attack of Darius was designed to avenge), 
when they, being in pursuit of the Cimme¬ 
rians, fell upon the Median territory, and sub¬ 
dued and held for a time almost the whole of 
Upper Asia; nor, again, that of the Atridae 
against Troy, of which we hear in story; nor 
that of the Mysians and Teucrians, which was 
still earlier, wherein these nations crossed the 


Bosphorus into Europe, and, after conquering 
all Thrace, pressed forward till they came to 
the Ionian Sea, while southward they reached 
as far as the river Peneus. 

21. All these expeditions, and others, if such 
there were, are as nothing compared with this. 
For was there a nation in all Asia which Xerx¬ 
es did not bring with him against Greece.^ Or 
was there a river, except those of unusual 
size, which sufficed for his troops to drink.? 
One nation furnished ships; another was ar¬ 
rayed among the foot-soldiers; a third had to 
supply horses; a fourth, transports for the 
horse and men likewise for the transport serv¬ 
ice; a fifth, ships of war towards the bridges; 
a sixth, ships and provisions. 

22. And in the first place, because the former 
fleet had met with so great a disaster about 
Athos, preparations were made, by the space 
of about three years, in that quarter. A fleet of 
triremes lay at Elaeus in the Chersonese; and 
from this station detachments were sent by the 
various nations whereof the army was com¬ 
posed, which relieved one another at intervals, 
and worked at a trench beneath the lash of 
taskmasters; while the people dwelling about 
Athos bore likewise a part in the labour. Two 
Persians, Bubares, the son of Megabazus, and 
Artachaees, the son of Artaeus, superintended 
the undertaking. 

Athos is a great and famous mountain, in¬ 
habited by men, and stretching far out into the 
sea. Where the mountain ends towards the 
mainland it forms a peninsula; and in this 
place there is a neck of land about twelve fur¬ 
longs across, the whole extent whereof, from 
the sea of the Acanthians to that over against 
Torone, is a level plain, broken only by a few 
low hills. Here, upon this isthmus where Athos 
ends, is Sane, a Greek city. Inside of Sane, and 
upon Athos itself, are a number of towns, 
which Xerxes was now employed in disjoining 
from the continent: these are Dium, Olophyx- 
us, Acrothoum, Thyssus, and Cleonae. Among 
these cities Athos was divided. 

23. Now the manner in which they dug was 
the following: a line was drawn across by the 
city of Sane; and along this the various nations 
parcelled out among themselves the work to 
be done. When the trench grew deep, the 
workmen at the bottom continued to dig, 
while others handed the earth, as it was dug 
out, to labourers placed higher up upon lad¬ 
ders, and these taking it, passed it on farther, 
till it came at last to those at the top, who 
carried it off and emptied it away. All the 



19-29] 

other nations, therefore, except the Phceni- 
cians, had double labour; for the sides of the 
trench fell in continually, as could not but 
happen, since they made the width no greater 
at the top than it was required to be at the 
bottom. But the Phoenicians showed in this the 
skill which they are wont to exhibit in all 
their undertakings. For in the portion of the 
work which was allotted to them they began 
by making the trench at the top twice as wide 
as the prescribed measure, and then as they 
dug downwards approached the sides nearer 
and nearer together, so that when they reached 
the bottom their part of the work was of the 
same width as the rest. In a meadow near, 
there was a place of assembly and a market; 
and hither great quantities of corn, ready 
ground, were brought from Asia. 

24. It seems to me, when I consider this 
work, that Xerxes, in making it, was actuated 
by a feeling of pride, wishing to display the 
extent of his power, and to leave a memorial 
behind him to posterity. For notwithstanding 
that it was open to him, with no trouble at 
all, to have had his ships drawn across the 
isthmus, yet he issued orders that a canal 
should be made through which the sea might 
flow, and that it should be of such a width as 
would allow of two triremes passing through 
it abreast with the oars in action. Fie likewise 
gave to the same persons who were set over the 
digging of the trench, the task of making a 
bridge across the river Strymon. 

25. While these things were in progress, he 
was having cables prepared for his bridges, 
some of papyrus and some of white flax, a 
business which he entrusted to the Phoeni¬ 
cians and the Egyptians. Fie likewise laid up 
stores of provisions in divers places, to save 
the army and the beasts of burthen from suf¬ 
fering want upon their march into Greece. He 

i inquired carefully about all the sites, and had 
[ the stores laid up in such as were most con¬ 
venient, causing them to be brought across 
from various parts of Asia and in various ways, 
some in transports and others in merchantmen. 
The greater portion was carried to Leuce-Acte, 
upon the Thracian coast; some part, however, 
was conveyed to Tyrodiza, in the country of 
the Perinthians, some to Doriscus, some to 
Ei'on upon the Strymon, and some to Mace¬ 
donia. 

26. During the time that all these labours 
I were in progress, the land army which had 
I been collected was marching with Xerxes 

towards Sardis, having started from Critalla 


221 

in Cappadocia. At this spot all the host which 
was about to accompany the king in his pass¬ 
age across the continent had been bidden to 
assemble. And here I have it not in my power 
to mention which of the satraps was adjudged 
to have brought his troops in the most gallant 
array, and on that account rewarded by the 
king according to his promise; for I do not 
know whether this matter ever came to a 
judgment. But it is certain that the host of 
Xerxes, after crossing the river Halys, marched 
through Phrygia till it reached the city of Ce- 
laenae. Here are the sources of the river Mae- 
ander, and likewise of another stream of no 
less size, which bears the name of Catarrhactes 
(or the Cataract); the last-named river has its 
rise in the market-place of Celaenae, and emp¬ 
ties itself into the Maeander. Here, too, in this 
market-place, is hung up to view the skin of 
the Silenus Marsyas, which Apollo, as the 
Phrygian story goes, stripped oft and placed 
there. 

27. Now there lived in this city a certain 
Pythius, the son of Atys, a Lydian. This man 
entertained Xerxes and his whole army in a 
most magnificent fashion, offering at the same 
time to give him a sum of money for the war. 
Xerxes, upon the mention of money, turned 
to the Persians who stood by, and asked of 
them, “Who is this Pythius, and what wealth 
has he, that he should venture on such an offer 
as this.?” They answered him, “This is the 
man, O king! who gave thy father Darius the 
golden plane-tree, and likewise the golden 
vine; and he is still the wealthiest man we 
know of in all the world, excepting thee ” 

28. Xerxes marvelled at these last words: 
and now, addressing Pythius with his own 
lips, he asked him what the amount of his 
wealth really was. Pythius answered as fol¬ 
lows:— 

“O king! I will not hide this matter from 
thee, nor make pretence that I do not know 
how rich I am; but as I know perfectly, I will 
declare all fully before thee. For when thy 
journey was noised abroad, and I heard thou 
wert coming down to the Grecian coast, 
straightway, as I wished to give thee a sum of 
money for the war, I made count of my stores, 
and found them to be two thousand talents of 
silver, and of gold four millions of Daric 
staters, wanting seven thousand. All this I 
willingly make over to thee as a gift; and when 
it is gone, my slaves and my estates in land 
will be wealth enough for my wants.” 

29. This speech charmed Xerxes, and he re- 


THE HISTORY 



222 HERODOTUS [Book vii 


plied, “Dear Lydian, since I left Persia there 
is no man but thou who has either desired to 
entertain my army, or come forward of his 
own free will to offer me a sum of money for 
the war. Thou hast done both the one and the 
other, feasting my troops magnificently, and 
now making offer of a right noble sum. In 
return, this is what I will bestow on thee. 
Thou shah be my sworn friend from this day; 
and the seven thousand staters which are 
wanting to make up thy four millions I will 
supply, so that the full tale may be no longer 
lacking, and that thou mayest owe the comple¬ 
tion of the round sum to me. Continue to 
enjoy all that thou hast acquired hitherto; and 
be sure to remain ever such as thou now art. 
If thou dost, thou wilt not repent of it so long 
as thy life endures.” 

30. When Xerxes had so spoken and had 
made good his promises to Pythius, he pressed 
forward upon his march; and passing Anaua, 
a Phrygian city, and a lake from which salt is 
gathered, he came to Colossae, a Phrygian city 
of great size, situated at a spot where the river 
Lycus plunges into a chasm and disappears. 
This river, after running under ground a dis¬ 
tance of about five furlongs, reappears once 
more, and empties itself, like the stream above 
mentioned, into the Maeander. Leaving Co- 
lossae, the army approached the borders of 
Phrygia where it abuts on Lydia; and here 
they came to a city called Cydrara, where was 
a pillar set up by Croesus, having an inscrip¬ 
tion on it, showing the boundaries of the two 
countries. 

31. Where it quits Phrygia and enters Lydia 
the road separates; the way on the left leads 
into Caria, while that on the right conducts 
to Sardis. If you follow this route, you must 
cross the Maeander, and then pass by the city 
Callatebus, where the men live who make 
honey out of wheat and the fruit of the tama¬ 
risk Xerxes, who chose this way, found here 
a plane-tree so beautiful, that he presented it 
with golden ornaments, and put it under the 
care of one of his Immortals. The day after, 
he entered the Lydian capital. 

32. Here his first care was to send off heralds 
into Greece, who were to prefer a demand for 
earth and water, and to require that prepara¬ 
tions should be made everywhere to feast the 
king. To Athens indeed and to Sparta he sent 
no such demand; but these cities excepted, his 
messengers went everywhere. Now the reason 
why he sent for earth and water to states which 
had already refused was this; he thought that 


although they had refused when Darius made 
the demand, they would now be too frightened 
to venture to say him nay. So he sent his her¬ 
alds, wishing to know for certain how it 
would be. 

33. Xerxes, after this, made preparations to 
advance to Abydos, where the bridge across 
the Hellespont from Asia to Europe was lately 
finished. Midway between Sestos and Ma- 
dytus in the Hellespontine Chersonese, and 
right over against Abydos, there is a rocky 
tongue of land which runs out for some dis¬ 
tance into the sea. This is the place where no 
long time afterwards the Greeks under Xan- 
thippus, the son of Ariphron, took Artayctes 
the Persian, who was at that time governor of 
Sestos, and nailed him living to a plank. He 
was the Artayctes who brought women into 
the temple of Protesilaiis at Elaeus, and there 
was guilty of most unholy deeds. 

34. Towards this tongue of land then, the 
men to whom the business was assigned car¬ 
ried out a double bridge from Abydos; and 
while the Phoenicians constructed one line 
with cables of white flax, the Egyptians in the 
other used ropes made of papyrus. Now it is 
seven furlongs across from Abydos to the op¬ 
posite coast. When, therefore, the channel had 
been bridged successfully, it happened that a 
great storm arising broke the whole work to 
pieces, and destroyed all that had been done. 

35. So when Xerxes heard of it he was full 
of wrath, and straightway gave orders that 
the Hellespont should receive three hundred 
lashes, and that a pair of fetters should be cast 
into it. Nay, I have even heard it said that he 
bade the branders take their irons and there¬ 
with brand the Hellespont. It is certain that he 
commanded those who scourged the waters to 
utter, as they lashed them, these barbarian and 
wicked words: “Thou bitter water, thy lord 
lays on thee this punishment because thou hast 
wronged him without a cause, having suffered 
no evil at his hands. Verily King Xerxes will 
cross thee, whether thou wilt or no. Well dost 
thou deserve that no man should honour thee 
with sacrifice; for thou art of a truth a treach¬ 
erous and unsavoury river.” While the sea 
was thus punished by his orders, he likewise 
commanded that the overseers of the work 
should lose their heads. 

36. Then they, whose business it was, ex¬ 
ecuted the unpleasing task laid upon them; 
and other master-builders were set over the 
work, who accomplished it in the way which 
I will now describe. 



30 - 40 ] THE HISTORY 223 


They joined together triremes and pente- 
conters, 360 to support the bridge on the side 
of the Euxine Sea, and 314 to sustain the 
other; and these they placed at right angles 
to the sea, and in the direction of the current 
of the Hellespont, relieving by these means 
the tension of the shore cables. Having joined^ 
the vessels, they moored them with anchors 
of unusual size, that the vessels of the bridge 
towards the Euxine might resist the winds 
which blow from within the straits, and that 
those of the more western bridge facing the 
Egean might withstand the winds which set 
in from the south and from the south-east. 
A gap was left in the penteconters in no fewer 
than three places, to afford a passage for such 
light craft as chose to enter or leave the Eux¬ 
ine. When all this was done, they made the 
cables taut from the shore by the help of wood¬ 
en capstans. This time, moreover, instead of 
using the two materials separately, they as¬ 
signed to each bridge six cables, two of which 
were of white flax, while four were of papyrus. 
Both cables were of the same size and quality; 
but the flaxen were the heavier, weighing not 
less than a talent the cubit. When the bridge 
across the channel was thus complete, trunks 
of trees were sawn into planks, which were 
cut to the width of the bridge, and these were 
laid side by side upon the tightened cables, 
and then fastened on the top. This done, 
brushwood was brought, and arranged upon 
the planks, after which earth was heaped upon 
the brushwood, and the whole trodden down 
into a solid mass. Lastly a bulwark was set up 
on either side of this causeway, of such a 
height as to prevent the sumpter-beasts and 
the horses from seeing over it and taking fright 
at the water. 

37. And now when all was prepared—the 
bridges, and the works at Athos, the break¬ 
waters about the mouths of the cutting, which 
were made to hinder the surf from blocking 
up the entrances, and the cutting itself; and 
when the news came to Xerxes that this last 
was completely finished—then at length the 
host, having first wintered at Sardis, began its 
march towards Abydos, fully equipped, on 
the first approach of spring. At the moment 
of departure, the sun suddenly quitted his seat 
in the heavens, and disappeared, though there 
were no clouds in sight, but the sky was clear 
and serene. Day was thus turned into night; 
whereupon Xerxes, who saw and remarked 
the prodigy, was seized with alarm, and send¬ 
ing at once for the Magians, inquired of them 


the meaning of the portent. They replied— 
“God is foreshowing to the Greeks the destruc¬ 
tion of their cities; for the sun foretells for 
them, and the moon for us.” So Xerxes, thus 
instructed, proceeded on his way with great 
gladness of heart. 

38. The army had begun its march, when 
Pythius the Lydian, affrighted at the heaven¬ 
ly portent, and emboldened by his gifts, came 
to Xerxes and said—“Grant me, O my lord! 
a favour which is to thee a light matter, but 
to me of vast account.” Then Xerxes, who 
looked for nothing less than such a prayer as 
Pythius in fact preferred, engaged to grant him 
whatever he wished, and commanded him to 
tell his wish freely. So Pythius, full of bold¬ 
ness, went on to say:— 

“O my lord! thy servant has five sons; and 
it chances that all are called upon to join thee 
in this march against Greece. I beseech thee, 
have compassion upon my years; and let one 
of my sons, the eldest, remain behind, to be 
my prop and stay, and the guardian of my 
wealth. Take with thee the other four; and 
when thou hast done all that is in thy heart, 
mayest thou come back in safety.” 

39. But Xerxes was greatly angered, and re¬ 
plied to him: “Thou wretch! darest thou speak 
to me of thy son, when I am myself on the 
march against Greece,.with sons, and brothers, 
and kinsfolk, and friends.^ Thou, who art my 
bond-slave, and art in duty bound to follow 
me with all thy household, not excepting thy 
wife! Know that man’s spirit dwelleth in his 
ears, and when it hears good things, straight¬ 
way it fills all his body with delight; but no 
sooner does it hear the contrary than it heaves 
and swells with passion. As when thou didst 
good deeds and madest good offers to me, 
thou wert not able to boast of having outdone 
the king in bountifulness, so now when thou 
art changed and grown impudent, thou shalt 
not receive all thy deserts, but less. For thyself 
and four of thy five sons, the entertainment 
which I had of thee shall gain protection; but 
as for him to whom thou clingest above the 
rest, the forfeit of his life shall be thy punish¬ 
ment.” Having thus spoken, forthwith he com¬ 
manded those to whom such tasks were as¬ 
signed to seek out the eldest of the sons of 
Pythius, and having cut his body asunder, to 
place the two halves, one on the right, the 
other on the left, of the great road, so that the 
army might march out between them. 

40. Then the king’s orders were obeyed; 
and the army marched out between the two 



224 HERODOTUS [Book vii 


halves of the carcase. First of all went the 
baggage-bearers, and the sumpter-beasts, and 
then a vast crowd of many nations mingled 
together without any intervals, amounting to 
more than one half of the army. After these 
troops an empty space was left, to separate be¬ 
tween them and the king. In front of the king 
went first a thousand horsemen, picked men of 
the Persian nation—then spearmen a thou¬ 
sand, likewise chosen troops, with their spear¬ 
heads pointing towards the ground—next ten 
of the sacred horses called Nissan, all daintily 
caparisoned. (Now these horses are called Ni¬ 
ssan, because they come from the Nissan 
plain, a vast flat in Media, producing horses 
of unusual size.) After the ten sacred horses 
came the holy chariot of Jupiter, drawn by 
eight milk-white steeds, with the charioteer on 
foot behind them holding the reins; for no 
mortal is ever allowed to mount into the car. 
Next to this came Xerxes himself, riding in a 
chariot drawn by Nissan horses, with his 
charioteer, Patiramphes, the son of Otanes, a 
Persian, standing by his side. 

41. Thus rode forth Xerxes from Sardis— 
but he was accustomed every now and then, 
when the fancy took him, to alight from his 
chariot and travel in a litter. Immediately be¬ 
hind the king there followed a body of a thou¬ 
sand spearmen, the noblest and bravest of the 
Persians, holding their lances in the usual man¬ 
ner—then came a thousand Persian horse, 
picked men—then ten thousand, picked also 
after the rest, and serving on foot. Of these 
last one thousand carried spears with golden 
pomegranates at their lower end instead of 
spikes; and these encircled the other nine thou¬ 
sand, who bore on their spears pomegranates 
of silver. The spearmen too who pointed their 
lances towards the ground had golden pome¬ 
granates; and the thousand Persians who fol¬ 
lowed close after Xerxes had golden apples. 
Behind the ten thousand footmen came a body 
of Persian cavalry, likewise ten thousand; after 
which there was again a void space for as much 
as two furlongs; and then the rest of the army 
followed in a confused crowd. 

42. The march of the army, after leaving 
Lydia, was directed upon the river Ca’icus and 
the land of Mysia. Beyond the Cai’cus the road, 
leaving Mount Cana upon the left, passed 
through the Atarnean plain, to the city of 
Carina. Quitting this, the troops advanced 
across the plain of Thebe, passing Adramyt- 
tium, and Antandrus, the Pelasgic city; then, 
holding Mount Ida upon the left hand, it 


entered the Trojan territory. On this march 
the Persians suffered some loss; for as they 
bivouacked during the night at the foot of Ida, 
a storm of thunder and lightning burst upon 
them, and killed no small number. 

43. On reaching the Scamander, which was 
the first stream, of all that they had crossed 
since they left Sardis, whose water failed them 
and did not suffice to satisfy the thirst of men 
and cattle, Xerxes ascended into the Pergamus 
of Priam, since he had a longing to behold the 
place. When he had seen everything, and in¬ 
quired into all particulars, he made an offer¬ 
ing of a thousand oxen to the Trojan Minerva, 
while the Magians poured libations to the 
heroes who were slain at Troy. The night after, 
a panic fell upon the camp: but in the morn¬ 
ing they set off with daylight, and skirting on 
the left hand the towns Rhceteum, Ophryne- 
um, and Dardanus (which borders on Aby- 
dos), on the right the Teucrians of Gergis, so 
reached Abydos. 

44. Arrived here, Xerxes wished to look 
upon all his host; so as there was a throne of 
white marble upon a hill near the city, which 
they of Abydos had prepared beforehand, by 
the king’s bidding, for his especial use, Xerxes 
took his seat on it, and, gazing thence upon the 
shore below, beheld at one view all his land 
forces and all his ships. While thus employed, 
he felt a desire to behold a sailing-match 
among his ships, which accordingly took place, 
and was won by the Phoenicians of Sidon, 
much to the joy of Xerxes, who was delighted 
alike with the race and with his army. 

45. And now, as he looked and saw the 
whole Hellespont covered with the vessels of 
his fleet, and all the shore and every plain 
about Abydos as full as possible of men, Xerxes 
congratulated himself on his good fortune; 
but after a little while he wept. 

46. Then Artabanus, the king’s uncle (the 
same who at the first so freely spake his mind 
to the king, and advised him not to lead his 
army against Greece), when he heard that 
Xerxes w^as in tears, went to him, and said:— 

“How different, sire, is what thou art now 
doing, from what thou didst a little while ago! 
Then thou didst congratulate thyself; and 
now, behold! thou weepest.” 

“There came upon me,” replied he, “a sud¬ 
den pity, when I thought of the shortness of 
man’s life, and considered that of all this host, 
so numerous as it is, not one will be alive when 
a hundred years are gone by.” 

“And yet there are sadder things in life than 




41 - 51 ] THE HISTORY 225 


that,” returned the other. “Short as our time 
is, there is no man, whether it be here among 
this multitude or elsewhere, who is so happy, 
as not to have felt the wish—I will not say once, 
but full many a time—that he were dead rather 
than alive. Calamities fall upon us; sicknesses 
vex and harass us, and make life, short though 
it be, to appear long. So death, through the 
wretchedness of our life, is a most sweet refuge 
to our race: and God, who gives us the tastes 
that we enjoy of pleasant times, is seen, in his 
very gift, to be envious.” 

47. “True,” said Xerxes; “human life is even 
such as thou hast painted it, O Artabanus! But 
for this very reason let us turn our thoughts 
from it, and not dwell on what is so sad, when 
pleasant things are in hand. Tell me rather, if 
the vision which we saw had not appeared so 
plainly to thyself, wouldst thou have been still 
of the same mind as formerly, and have con¬ 
tinued to dissuade me from warring against 
Greece, or wouldst thou at this time think dif¬ 
ferently? Come now, tell me this honestly.” 

“O king!” replied the other, “may the dream 
which hath appeared to us have such issue as 
we both desire! For my own part, I am still 
full of fear, and have scarcely power to control 
myself, when I consider all our dangers, and 
especially when I see that the two things which 
are of most consequence are alike opposed to 
thee.” 

48. “Thou strange man!” said Xerxes in re¬ 
ply—“what, I pray thee, are the two things 
thou speakest of? Does my land army seem to 
thee too small in number, and will the Greeks, 
thinkest thou, bring into the field a more 
numerous host? Or is it our fleet which thou 
deemest weaker than theirs? Or art thou fear¬ 
ful on both accounts? If in thy judgment we 
fall short in either respect, it were easy to bring 
together with all speed another armament.” 

49. “O king!” said Artabanus, “it is not 
possible that a man of understanding should 
find fault with the size of thy army or the 
number of thy ships. The more thou addest to 
these, the more hostile will those two things, 
whereof I spake, become. Those two things 
are the land and the sea. In all the wide sea 
there is not, I imagine, anywhere a harbour 
large enough to receive thy vessels, in case a 
storm arise, and afford them a sure protection. 
And yet thou wilt want, not one such harbour 
only, but many in succession, along the entire 
coast by which thou art about to make thy 
advance. In default then of such harbours, it 
is well to bear in mind that chances rule men. 


and not men chances. Such is the first of the 
two dangers; and now I will speak to thee of 
the second. The land will also be thine enemy; 
for if no one resists thy advance, as thou pro- 
ceedest farther and farther, insensibly allured 
onwards (for who is ever sated with success?), 
thou wilt find it more and more hostile. I 
mean this, that, should nothing else withstand 
thee, yet the mere distance, becoming greater 
as time goes on, will at last produce a famine. 
Methinks it is best for men, when they take 
counsel, to be timorous, and imagine all possi¬ 
ble calamities, but when the time for action 
comes, then to deal boldly.” 

50. Whereto Xerxes answered—“There is 
reason, O Artabanus! in everything which 
thou hast said; but I pray thee, fear not all 
things alike, nor count up every risk. For if in 
each matter that comes before us thou wilt look 
to all possible chances, never wilt thou achieve 
anything. Far better is it to have a stout heart 
always, and suffer one’s share of evils, than 
to be ever fearing what may happen, and never 
incur a mischance. Moreover, if thou wilt op¬ 
pose whatever is said by others, without thy¬ 
self showing us the sure course which we 
ought to take, thou art as likely to lead us into 
failure as they who advise differently; for thou 
art but on a par with them. And as for that 
sure course, how canst thou show it us when 
thou art but a man? I do not believe thou 
canst. Success for the most part attends those 
who act boldly, not those who weigh every¬ 
thing, and are slack to venture. Thou seest to 
how great a height the power of Persia has 
now reached—never would it have grown to 
this point if they who sate upon the throne be¬ 
fore me had been like-minded with thee, or 
even, though not like-minded, had listened to 
councillors of such a spirit. ’Twas by brave ven¬ 
tures that they extended their sway; for great 
empires can only be conquered by great risks. 
We follow then the example of our fathers in 
making this march; and we set forward at the 
best season of the year; so, when we have 
brought Europe under us, we shall return, 
without suffering from want or experiencing 
any other calamity. For while on the one hand 
we carry vast stores of provisions with us, on 
the other we shall have the grain of all the 
countries and nations that we attack; since our 
march is not directed against a pastoral people, 
but against men who are tillers of the ground.” 

51. Then said Artabanus—“If, sire, thou 
art determined that we shall not fear anything, 
at least hearken to a counsel which I wish to 







226 HERODOTUS [Book vn 


ofler; for when the matters in hand are so 
many, one cannot but have much to say. Thou 
knowest that Cyrus the son of Cambyses re¬ 
duced and made tributary to the Persians all 
the race of the lonians, except only those of 
Attica.^ Now my advice is that thou on no ac¬ 
count lead forth these men against their fa¬ 
thers; since we are well able to overcome them 
without such aid. Their choice, if we take them 
with us to the war, lies between showing them¬ 
selves the most wicked of men by helping to 
enslave their fatherland, or the most righteous 
by joining in the struggle to keep it free. If 
then they choose the side of injustice, they will 
do us but scant good; while if they determine 
to act justly, they may greatly injure our host. 
Lay thou to heart the old proverb, which says 
truly, ‘The beginning and end of a matter are 
not always seen at once.’ ” 

52. “Artabanus,” answered Xerxes, “there 
is nothing in all that thou hast said, wherein 
thou art so wholly wrong as in this, that thou 
suspectest the faith of the lonians. Have they 
not given us the surest proof of their attach¬ 
ment—a proof which thou didst thyself wit¬ 
ness, and likewise all those who fought with 
Darius against the Scythians? When it lay 
wholly with them to save or to destroy the en¬ 
tire Persian army, they dealt by us honourably 
and with good faith, and did us no hurt at all. 
Besides, they will leave behind them in our 
country their wives, their children, and their 
properties—can it then be conceived that they 
will attempt rebellion? Have no fear, there¬ 
fore, on this score; but keep a brave heart and 
uphold my house and empire. To thee, and 
thee only, do I intrust my sovereignty.” 

53. After Xerxes had thus spoken, and had 
sent Artabanus away to return to Susa, he sum¬ 
moned before him all the Persians of most re¬ 
pute, and when they appeared, addressed them 
in these words:— 

“Persians, I have brought you together be¬ 
cause I wished to exhort you to behave bravely, 
and not to sully with disgrace the former 
achievements of the Persian people, which are 
very great and famous. Rather let us one and 
all, singly and jointly, exert ourselves to the 
uttermost; for the matter wherein we are en¬ 
gaged concerns the common weal. Strain ev¬ 
ery nerve, then, I beseech you, in this war. 
Brave warriors are the men we march against, 
if report says true; and such that, if we con- 

^ This, of course, was not true; but the Persians 
might not unnaturally be supposed ignorant of all 
the lonians of Europe except the Athenians. 


quer them, there is not a people in all the I 
world which will venture thereafter to with- • 
stand our arms. And now let us offer prayers • 
to the gods who watch over the welfare of Per¬ 
sia, and then cross the channel.” 

54. All that day the preparations for the pas¬ 
sage continued; and on the morrow they burnt ' 
all kinds of spices upon the bridges, and 
strewed the way with myrtle boughs, while 
they waited anxiously for the sun, which they 
hoped to see as he rose. And now the sun ap- jl 
peared; and Xerxes took a golden goblet and I 
poured from it a libation into the sea, praying V 
the while with his face turned to the sun “that k 
no misfortune might befall him such as to hin- { 
der his conquest of Europe, until he had pene- • 
trated to its uttermost boundaries.” After he ! 
had prayed, he cast the golden cup into the • 
Hellespont, and with it a golden bowl, and a i 
Persian sword of the kind which they call | 
acinaces. I cannot say for certain whether it I 
was as an offering to the sun-god that he threw 1 
these things into the deep, or whether he had < 
repented of having scourged the Hellespont, 
and thought by his gifts to make amends to the I 
sea for what he had done. 

55. When, however, his offerings were 
made, the army began to cross; and the foot- 
soldiers, with the horsemen, passed over by one 
of the bridges—that (namely) which lay to¬ 
wards the Euxine—while the sumpter-beasts 
and the camp-followers passed by the other, 
which looked on the Egean. Foremost went ' 
the Ten Thousand Persians, all wearing gar- 1 
lands upon their heads; and after them a mixed 1 
multitude of many nations. These crossed i 
upon the first day. 

On the next day the horsemen began the pas- i 
sage; and with them went the soldiers who 
carried their spears with the point downwards, 
garlanded, like the Ten Thousand;—then 
came the sacred horses and the sacred chariot; 
next Xerxes with his lancers and the thousand 
horse; then the rest of the army. At the same j 
time the ships sailed over to the opposite * 
shore. According, however, to another account 
which I have heard, the king crossed the last, s 

56. As soon as Xerxes had reached the Eu¬ 
ropean side, he stood to contemplate his army | 
as they crossed under the lash. And the cross- ' 
ing continued during seven days and seven 
nights, without rest or pause. ’Tis said that 
here, after Xerxes had made the passage, a 
Hellespontian exclaimed— 

“Why, O Jove, dost thou, in the likeness of 
a Persian man, and with the name of Xerxes 












52 - 62 ] THE HISTORY 227 


instead of thine own, lead the whole race of 
mankind to the destruction of Greece? It 
would have been as easy for thee to destroy it 
without their aid!” 

57. When the whole army had crossed, and 
the troops were now upon their march, a 
strange prodigy appeared to them, whereof the 
king made no account, though its meaning 
was not difficult to conjecture. Now the prod¬ 
igy was this:—a mare brought forth a hare. 
Hereby it was shown plainly enough, that Xer¬ 
xes would lead forth his host against Greece 
with mighty pomp and splendour, but, in or¬ 
der to reach again the spot from which he set 
out, would have to run for his life. There had 
also been another portent, while Xerxes was 
still at Sardis—a mule dropped a foal, neither 
male nor female; but this likewise was disre¬ 
garded. 

58. So Xerxes, despising the omens, 
marched forwards; and his land army accom¬ 
panied him. But the fleet held an opposite 
course, and, sailing to the mouth of the Hel¬ 
lespont, made its way along the shore. Thus 
the fleet proceeded westward, making for 
Cape Sarpedon, where the orders were that it 
should await the coming up of the troops; but 
the land army marched eastward along the 
Chersonese, leaving on the right the tomb of 
Helle, the daughter of Athamas, and on the 
left the city of Cardia. Having passed through 
the town which is called Agora, they skirted 
the shores of the Gulf of Melas, and then 
crossed the river Melas, whence the gulf takes 
its name, the waters of which they found too 
scanty to supply the host. From this point their 
march was to the west; and after passing 
^nos, an .Tolian settlement, and likewise 
Lake Stentoris, they came to Doriscus. 

59. The name Doriscus is given to a heach 
and a vast plain upon the coast of Thrace, 
through the middle of which flows the strong 
stream of the Hebrus. Here was the royal fort 
which is likewise called Doriscus, where Dari¬ 
us had maintained a Persian garrison ever 
since the time when he attacked the Scythians. 
This place seemed to Xerxes a convenient spot 
for reviewing and numbering his soldiers; 
which things accordingly he proceeded to do. 
The sea-captains, who had brought the fleet 
to Doriscus, were ordered to take the vessels 
to the beach adjoining, where Sale stands, a 
city of the Samothracians, and Zone, another 
city. The beach extends to Serrheum, the well- 
known promontory; the whole district in for¬ 
mer times was inhabited by the Ciconians. 


Here then the captains were to bring their 
ships, and to haul them ashore for refitting, 
while Xerxes at Doriscus was employed in 
numbering the soldiers. 

60. What the exact number of the troops of 
each nation was I cannot say with certainty— 
for it is not mentioned by any one—but the 
whole land army together was found to 
amount to one million seven hundred thou¬ 
sand men. The manner in which the number¬ 
ing took place was the following. A body of ten 
thousand men was brought to a certain place, 
and the men were made to stand as close to¬ 
gether as possible; after which a circle was 
drawn around them, and the men were let go: 
then where the circle had been, a fence was 
built about the height of a man’s middle; and 
the enclosure was filled continually with fresh 
troops, till the whole army had in this way 
been numbered. When the numbering was 
over, the troops were drawn up according to 
their several nations. 

61. Now these were the nations that took 
part in this expedition. The Persians, who 
wore on their heads the soft hat called the 
tiara, and about their bodies, tunics with 
sleeves of divers colours, having iron scales 
upon them like the scales of a fish. Their legs 
were protected by trousers; and they bore 
wicker shields for bucklers; their quivers 
hanging at their backs, and their arms being a 
short spear, a bow of uncommon size, and ar¬ 
rows of reed. They had likewise daggers sus¬ 
pended from their girdles along their right 
thighs. Otanes, the father of Xerxes’ wife, 
Amestris, was their leader. This j>eople was 
known to the Greeks in ancient times by the 
name of Cephenians; but they called them¬ 
selves and were called by their neighbours, Ar- 
taeans. It was not till Perseus, the son of Jove 
and Danae, visited Cepheus the son of Belus, 
and, marrying his daughter Andromeda, had 
by her a son called Perses (whom he left be¬ 
hind him in the country because Cepheus had 
no male offspring), that the nation took from 
this Perses the name of Persians. 

62. The Medes had exactly the same equip¬ 
ment as the Persians; and indeed the dress 
common to both is not so much Persian as 
Median. They had for commander Tigranes, 
of the race of the Achaemenids. These Medes 
were called anciently by all people Arians; but 
when Medea, the Colchian, came to them from 
Athens, they changed their name. Such is the 
account which they themselves give. 

The Cissians were equipped in the Persian 








228 HERODOTUS [Book vii 


fashion, except in one respect:—they wore on 
their heads, instead of hats, fillets. Anaphes, 
the son of Otanes, commanded them. 

The Hyrcanians were likewise armed in the 
same way as the Persians. Their leader was 
Megapanus, the same who was afterwards sa¬ 
trap of Babylon. 

63. The Assyrians went to the war with hel¬ 
mets upon their heads made of brass, and plait¬ 
ed in a strange fashion which it is not easy to 
describe. They carried shields, lances, and dag¬ 
gers very like the Egyptian; but in addition, 
they had wooden clubs knotted with iron, and 
linen corselets. This people, whom the Greeks 
call Syrians, are called Assyrians by the bar¬ 
barians. The Chaldaeans served in their ranks, 
and they had for commander Otaspes, the son 
of Artachaeus. 

64. The Bactrians went to the war wearing 
a head-dress very like the Median, but armed 
with hows of cane, after the custom of their 
country, and with short spears. 

The Sacae, or Scyths, were clad in trousers, 
and had on their heads tall stiff caps rising to a 
point. They bore the bow of their country and 
the dagger; besides which they carried the 
battle-axe, or sagaris. They were in truth 
Amyrgian Scythians, but the Persians called 
them Sacae, since that is the name which they 
give to all Scythians. The Bactrians and the 
Sacae had for leader Hystaspes, the son of Dari¬ 
us and of Atossa, the daughter of Cyrus. 

65. The Indians wore cotton dresses, and 
carried bows of cane, and arrows also of cane 
with iron at the point. Such was the equip¬ 
ment of the Indians, and they marched under 
the command of Pharnazathres the son of Ar- 
tabates. 

66. The Arians carried Median bows, but in 
other respects were equipped like the Bactri¬ 
ans. Their commander was Sisamnes the son 
of Hydarnes. 

The Parthians and Chorasmians, with the 
Sogdians, the Gandarians, and the Dadicae, 
had the Bactrian equipment in all respects. 
The Parthians and Chorasmians were com¬ 
manded by Artabazus the son of Pharnaces, 
the Sogdians by Azanes the son of Artaeus, and 
the Gandarians and Dadicas by Artyphius the 
son of Artabanus. 

67. The Caspians were clad in cloaks, of 
skin, and carried the cane bow of their coun¬ 
try and the scymitar. So equipped they went 
to the war; and they had for commander Ario- 
mardus the brother of Artyphius. 

The Sarangians had dyed garments which 


showed brightly, and buskins which reached 
to the knee: they bore Median bows, and lan¬ 
ces. Their leader was Pherendates, the son of 
Megabazus. 

The Pactyans wore cloaks of skin, and car¬ 
ried the bow of their country and the dagger. 
Their commander was Artyntes, the son of 
Ithamatres. 

68. The Utians. the Mycians, and the Pari- ^ 

canians were all equipped like the Pactyans. 
They had for leaders, Arsamenes, the son of 1 
Darius, who commanded the Utians and Myci- | 
ans; and Siromitres, the son of CEobazus, who 1 
commanded the Paricanians. 1 

69. The Arabians wore the zeira, or long * 

cloak, fastened about them with a girdle: and | 
carried at their right side long bows, which 11 
when unstrung bent backwards. I 

The Ethiopians were clothed in the skins of 
leopards and lions, and had long bows made of r 
the stem of the palm-leaf, not less than four [ 
cubits in length. On these they laid short ar¬ 
rows made of reed, and armed at the tip, not | 
with iron, but with a piece of stone, sharpened 1 
to a point, of the kind used in engraving seals. 
They carried likewise spears, the head of 
which was the sharpened horn of an antelope; ; 
and in addition they had knotted clubs. When 
they went into battle they painted their bodies, ; 
half with chalk, and half with vermilion. The P 
Arabians, and the Ethiopians who came from i 
the region above Egypt, were commanded by I 
.\rsames, the son of Darius and of Artystonc p 
daughter of Cyrus. This Artystone was the p 
best-beloved of all the wives of Darius; and it N 
was she whose statue he caused to be made of r 
gold wrought with the hammer. Her son Ar- 
sames commanded these two nations. ( 

70. The eastern Ethiopians—for two na- ii 

tions of this name served in the army—were ' 
marshalled with the Indians. They differed in 
nothing from the other Ethiopians, save in 
their language, and the character of their hair. 
For the eastern Ethiopians have straight hair, I 
while they of Libya are more woolly-haired , 
than any other people in the world. Their ,, 
equipment was in most points like that of the ( 
Indians; but they wore upon their heads the ' 
scalps of horses, with the ears and mane at¬ 
tached; the ears were made to stand upright, 
and the mane served as a crest. For shields this [ 
people made use of the skins of cranes. 1 

71. The Libyans wore a dress of leather, and || 
carried javelins made hard in the fire. They I' 
had for commander Massages, the son of Oari- j 








229 


63 - 81 ] the history 


72. The Paphlagonians went to the war 
with plaited helmets upon their heads, and 
carrying small shields and spears of no great 
size. They had also javelins and daggers, and 
wore on their feet the buskin of their country, 
which reached half way up the shank. In the 
same fashion were equipped the Ligyans, the 
Matienians, the Mariandynians, and the Syri¬ 
ans (or Cappadocians, as they are called by the 
Persians). The Paphlagonians and Matienians 
were under the command of Ddtus the son of 
Megasidrus; while the Mariandynians, the Li¬ 
gyans, and the Syrians had for leader Gobryas, 
the son of Darius and Arty stone. 

73. The dress of the Phrygians closely re¬ 
sembled the Paphlagonian, only in a very few 
points diflering from it. According to the 
Macedonian account, the Phrygians, during 
the time that they had their abode in Europe 
and dwelt with them in Macedonia, bore the 
name of Brigians; but on their removal to Asia 
they changed their designation at the same 
time with their dwelling-place. 

The Armenians, who are Phrygian colo¬ 
nists, were armed in the Phrygian fashion. Both 
nations were under the command of Artoch- 
mes, who was married to one of the daughters 
of Darius. 

74. The Lydians were armed very nearly in 
the Grecian manner. These Lydians in ancient 
times were called Mxonians, but changed their 
name, and took their present title from Lydus 
the son of Atys. 

The Mysians wore upon their heads a hel¬ 
met made after the fashion of their country, 
and carried a small buckler; they used as jave¬ 
lins staves with one end hardened in the lire. 
The Mysians are Lydian colonists, and from 
the mountain-chain of Olympus, are called 
Olympieni. Both the Lydians and the Mysians 
were under the command of Artaphernes, the 
son of that Artaphernes who, with Dalis, 
made the landing at Marathon. 

75. The Thracians went to the war wearing 
the skins of foxes upon their heads, and about 
their bodies tunics, over which was thrown a 
long cloak of many colours. Their legs and 
feet were clad in buskins made from the skins 
of fawns; and they had for arms javelins, with 
light targes, and short dirks. This people, after 
crossing into Asia, took the name of Bithyni- 
ans; before, they had been called Strymonians, 
while they dwelt upon the Strymon; whence, 
according to their own account, they had been 
driven out by the Mysians and Teucrians. The 
commander of these Asiatic Thracians was 


Bassaces the son of Artabanus. 

76. h . . had small shields made of the hide 
of the ox, and carried each ot them two spears 
such as are used in wolf-hunting. Brazen hel¬ 
mets protected their heads; and above these 
they wore the ears and horns of an ox fash¬ 
ioned in brass. They had also crests on their 
helms; and their legs were bound round with 
purple bands. There is an oracle of Mars in the 
country of this people. 

77. The Cabalians, who are Maonians, but 
are called Lasonians, had the same equipment 
as the Cilicians—an equipment which I shall 
describe when 1 come in due course to the Ci- 
lician contingent. 

The Milyans bore short spears, and had their 
garments fastened with buckles. Some of their 
number carried Lycian bows. They wore about 
their heads skull-caps made of leather. Ikulres 
the son of Hystanes led both nations to battle. 

78. The Moschians wore helmets made of 
wood, and carried shields and spears of a small 
size: their spear-heads, however, were long. 
The Moschian equipment was that likewise of 
the Tibarenians, the Macronians, and the 
Mosyncrcians. The leaders of these nations 
were the following: the Moschians and Tiba¬ 
renians were under the command of Ariomar- 
dus, who was the son of Darius and of Parmys, 
daughter of Smerdis son of Cyrus; while the 
Macronians and Mosynaxians had for leader 
Artayctes, the son of Cherasmis, the governor 
of Sestos upon the Hellespont. 

79. The Mares wore on their heads the 
plaited helmet [X'culiar to their country, and 
used small leathern bucklers, and javelins. 

The Colchians wore wooden helmets, and 
carried small shields of raw hide, and short 
spears; besides which they had swords. Both 
Mares and Colchians were under the command 
of Pharandates, the son of Teaspes. 

The Alarodians and Saspirians were armed 
like the Colchians; their leader was Masistes, 
the son of Siromitras. 

80. The Islanders who came from the Ery¬ 
thraean Sea, where they inhabited the islands 
to which the king sends those whom he ban¬ 
ishes, wore a dress and arms almost exactly 
like the Median. Their leader was Mardontes 
the son of Bagaeus, who the year after per¬ 
ished in the battle of Mycale, where he was 
one .of the captains. 

81. Such were the nations who fought upon 

^ There is a defect here in the text of Herodotus; 
the name of the nation has been lost and cannot 
be satisfactorily supplied. 


230 HERODOTUS rBooKviii 


the dry land, and made up the infantry of the 
Persians. And they were commanded by the 
captains whose names have been above record¬ 
ed. The marshalling and numbering of the 
troops had been committed to them; and by 
them were appointed the captains over a thou¬ 
sand, and the captains over ten thousand; but 
the leaders of ten men, or a hundred, were 
named by the captains over ten thousand. 
There were other officers also, who gave the 
orders to the various ranks and nations; but 
those whom I have mentioned above were the 
commanders. 

82. Over these commanders themselves, and 
over the whole of the infantry, there were set 
six generals—namely, Mardonius, son of Go- 
bryas; Tritantsechmes, son of the Artabanus 
who gave his advice against the war with 
Greece; Smerdomenes, son of Otanes—these 
two were the sons of Darius’ brothers, and thus 
were cousins of Xerxes—Masistes, son of Dari¬ 
us and Atossa; Gergis, son of Arizus; and 
Megabyzus, son of Zopyrus. 

83. The whole of the infantry was under the 
command of these generals, excepting the Ten 
Thousand. The Ten Thousand, who were all 
Persians and all picked men, were led by Hy- 
darnes, the son of Hydarnes. They were called 
“the Immortals,” for the following reason. If 
one of their body failed either by the stroke of 
death or of disease, forthwith his place was 
filled up by another man, so that their num¬ 
ber was at no time either greater or less than 
10,000. 

Of all the troops the Persians were adorned 
with the greatest magnificence, and they were 
likewise the most valiant. Besides their arms, 
which have been already described, they glit¬ 
tered all over with gold, vast quantities of 
which they wore about their persons. They 
were followed by litters, wherein rode their 
concubines, and by a numerous train of attend¬ 
ants handsomely dressed. Camels and sumpter- 
beasts carried their provision, apart from 
that of the other soldiers. 

84. All these various nations fight on horse¬ 
back; they did not, however, at this time all 
furnish horsemen, but only the following:— 

(i.) The Persians, who were armed in the 
same way as their own footmen, excepting 
that some of them wore upon their heads 
devices fashioned with the hammer in brass 
or steel. 

85. (ii.) The wandering tribe known by 
the name of Sagartians—a people Persian in 
language, and in dress half Persian, half Pac- 


tyan, who furnished to the army as many as 
eight thousand horse. It is not the wont of ' 
this people to carry arms, either of bronze or I 
steel, except only a dirk; but they use lassoes ' 
made of thongs plaited together, and trust to 1 
these whenever they go to the wars. Now the t 
manner in which they fight is the following: 
when they meet their enemy, straightway they 
discharge their lassoes, which end in a noose; 1 
then, whatever the noose encircles, be it man 
or be it horse, they drag towards them; and * 
the foe, entangled in the toils, is forthwith 
slain. Such is the manner in which this people 
fight; and now their horsemen were drawn up I 
with the Persians. 

86. (iii.) The Medes, and Cissians, who 1 
had the same equipment as their foot-soldiers. 

(iv.) The Indians, equipped as their foot¬ 
men, but some on horseback and some in chari¬ 
ots—the chariots drawn either by horses, or 
by wild asses. 

(v.) The Bactrians and Caspians, arrayed 
as their foot-soldiers. 

(vi.) The Libyans, equipped as their foot- 
soldiers, like the rest; but all riding in chariots, 

(vii.) The Caspeirians and Paricanians, , 
equipped as their foot-soldiers. 

(viii.) The Arabians, in the same array as • 
their footmen, but all riding on camels, not 
inferior in fleetness to horses. 

87. These nations, and these only, furnished 
horse to the army: and the number of the horse 
was eighty thousand, without counting cam¬ 
els or chariots. All were marshalled in squad¬ 
rons, excepting the Arabians; who were placed 
last, to avoid frightening the horses, which 
cannot endure the sight of the camel. 

88. The horse was commanded by Arma- 

mithras and Tithaeus, sons of Datis. The other 
commander, Pharnuches, who was to have 
been their colleague, had been left sick at Sar- , 
dis; since at the moment that he was leaving t 
the city, a sad mischance befell him:—a dog f 
ran under the feet of the horse upon which he 1 
was mounted; and the horse, not seeing it 
coming, was startled, and, rearing bolt up¬ 
right, threw his rider. After this fall Phar¬ 
nuches spat blood, and fell into a consumption. ' 
As for the horse, he was treated at once as ' 
Pharnuches ordered: the attendants took him 
to the spot where he had thrown his master, 1 
and there cut off his four legs at the hough. , 
Thus Pharnuches lost his command. 1 

89. The triremes amounted in all to twelve 
hundred and seven; and were furnished by the I 
following nations:— 





S2<)6] the history 231 


(i.) The Phccnlcians, with the Syrians of 
Palestine, furnished three hundred vessels, the 
crews of which were thus accoutred: upon 
their heads they wore helmets made nearly in 
the Grecian manner; about their bodies they 
had breastplates of linen; they carried shields 
without rims; and were armed with javelins. 
This nation, according to their own account, 
dwelt anciently upon the Erythraean Sea, but 
crossing thence, fixed themselves on the sea- 
coast of Syria, where they still inhabit. This 
part of Syria, and all the region extending from 
hence to Egypt, is known by the name of Pales¬ 
tine. 

(ii.) The Egyptians furnished two hundred 
ships. Their crews had plaited helmets upon 
their heads, and bore concave shields with rims 
of unusual size. They were armed with spears 
suited for a sea-fight, and with huge pole-axes. 
The greater part of them wore breastplates; 
and all had long cutlasses. 

90. (iii.) The Cyprians furnished a hun¬ 
dred and fifty ships, and were equipped in the 
following fashion. Their kings had turbans 
bound about their heads, while the people 
wore tunics; in other respects they were clad 
like the Greeks. They are of various races; 
some are sprung from Athens and Salamis, 
some from Arcadia, some from Cythnus, some 
from Phoenicia, and a portion, according to 
their own account, from Ethiopia. 

91. (iv.) The Cilicians furnished a hun¬ 
dred ships. The crews wore upon their heads 
the helmet of their country, and carried in¬ 
stead of shields light targes made of raw hide; 
they were clad in woollen tunics, and were 
each armed with two javelins, and a sword 
closely resembling the cutlass of the Egyptians. 
This people bore anciently the name of Hy- 
pachaeans, but took their present title from 
Cilix, the son of Agenor, a Phoenician. 

(v.) The Pamphylians furnished thirty 
ships, the crews of which were armed exactly 
as the Greeks. This nation is descended from 
those who on the return from Troy were dis¬ 
persed with Amphilochus and Calchas. 

92. (vi.) The Lycians furnished fifty ships. 
Their crews wore greaves and breastplates, 
while for arms they had bows of cornel wood, 
reed arrows without feathers, and javelins. 
Their outer garment was the skin of a goat, 
which hung from their shoulders; their head¬ 
dress a hat encircled with plumes; and besides 
their other weapons they carried daggers and 
falchions. This people came from Crete, and 
were once called Termilae; they got the name 


which they now bear from Lycus, the son of 
Pandion, an Athenian. 

93. (vii.) The Dorians of Asia furnished 
thirty ships. They were armed in the Grecian 
fashion, inasmuch as their forefathers came 
from the Peloponnese. 

(viii.) The Carians furnished seventy ships, 
and were equipped like the Greeks, but car¬ 
ried, in addition, falchions and daggers. What 
name the Carians bore anciently was declared 
in the first part of this History. 

94. (ix.) The lonians furnished a hundred 
ships, and were armed like the Greeks. Now 
these lonians, during the time that they dwell 
in the Peloponnese and inhabited the land now 
called Achara (which was before the arrival of 
Danaiis and Xuthus in the Peloponnese), were 
called, according to the Greek account, Tgi 
alean Pelasgi, or “Pelasgi of the Sea-shore”; 
but afterwards, from Ion the son of Xuthus, 
they were called lonians. 

95. The Islanders furnished seventeen ships, 
and wore arms like the Greeks. They too were 
a Pelasgian race, who in later times took the 
name of lonians for the same reason as those 
who inhabited the twelve cities founded from 
Athens. 

The /Eolians furnished sixty ships, and were 
equipped in the Grecian fashion. They too 
were anciently called Pelasgians, as the Greeks 
declare. 

The Hellespontians from the Pontus, who 
are colonists of the lonians and Dorians, fur¬ 
nished a hundred ships, the crews of which 
wore the Grecian armour. This did not include 
the Abydenians, who stayed in their own 
country, because the king had assigned them 
the special duty of guarding the bridges. 

96. On board of every ship was a band of 
soldiers, Persians, Medes, or Sacans. The 
Phoenician ships were the best sailers in the 
fleet, and the Sidonian the best among the 
Phoenicians. The contingent of each nation, 
whether to the fleet or to the land army, had 
at its head a native leader; but the names of 
these leaders I shall not mention, as it is not 
necessary for the course of my History. For 
the leaders of some nations were not worthy 
to have their names recorded; and besides, 
there were in each nation as many leaders as 
there were cities. And it was not really as com¬ 
manders that they accompanied the army, but as 
mere slaves, like the rest of the host. For I have 
already mentioned the Persian generals who 
had theactual command, and were at the head of 
the several nations which composed the army. 


232 HERODOTUS TBook vii 


97. The fleet was commanded by the follow¬ 
ing—Ariabignes, the son of Darius, Prexaspes, 
the son of Aspathines, Megabazus, the son of 
Megabates, and Acha:menes, the son of Dari¬ 
us. Ariabignes, who was the child of Darius 
by a daughter of Gobryas, was leader of the 
Ionian and Carian ships; Achaemenes, who 
was own brother to Xerxes, of the Egyptian; 
the rest of the fleet was commanded by the 
other two. Besides the triremes, there was an 
assemblage of thirty-oared and fifty-oared gal¬ 
leys, of cercuri, and transports for conveying 
horses, amounting in all to three thousand. 

98. Next to the commanders, the following 
were the most renowned of those who sailed 
aboard the fleet:—Tetramnestus, the son of 
Anysus, the Sidonian; Mapen, the son of Si- 
rom, the Tyrian; Merbal, the son of Agbal, the 
Aradian; Syennesis, the son of Oromedon, the 
Cilician; Cyberniscus, the son of Sicas, the Ly- 
cian; Gorgus, the son of Chersis, and Timo- 
nax, the son of Timagoras, the Cyprians; and 
Histiaeus, the son of Timnes, Pigres, the son 
of Seldomus, and Damasithymus, the son of 
Candaules, the Carians. 

99. Of the other lower officers I shall make 
no mention, since no necessity is laid on me; 
but I must speak of a certain leader named 
Artemisia, whose participation in the attack 
upon Greece, notwithstanding that she was a 
woman, moves my special wonder. She had 
obtained the sovereign power after the death 
of her husband; and, though she had now a 
son grown up, yet her brave spirit and manly 
daring sent her forth to the war, when no need 
required her to adventure. Her name, as I 
said, was Artemisia, and she was the daughter 
of Lygdamis; by race she was on his side a 
Halicarnassian, though by her mother a Cre¬ 
tan. She ruled over the Halicarnassians, the 
men of Cos, of Nisyrus, and of Calydna; and 
the five triremes which she furnished to the 
Persians were, next to the Sidonian, the most 
famous ships in the fleet. She likewise gave to 
Xerxes sounder counsel than any of his other 
allies. Now the cities over which I have men¬ 
tioned that she bore sway were one and all 
Dorian; for the Halicarnassians were colonists 
from Troezen, while the remainder were from 
Epidaurus. Thus much concerning the sea- 
force. 

100. Now when the numbering and mar¬ 
shalling of the host was ended, Xerxes con¬ 
ceived a wish to go himself throughout the 
forces, and with his own eyes behold every¬ 
thing. Accordingly he traversed the ranks seat¬ 


ed in his chariot, and, going from nation to 
nation, made manifold inquiries, while his 
scribes wrote down the answers; till at last he 
had passed from end to end of the whole land 
army, both the horsemen and likewise the foot. 
This done, he exchanged his chariot for a 
Sidonian galley, and, seated beneath a golden 
awning, sailed along the prows of all his ves¬ 
sels (the vessels having now been hauled down 
and launched into the sea), while he made in¬ 
quiries again, as he had done when he re¬ 
viewed the land-force, and caused the answers 
to be recorded by his scribes. The captains took 
their ships to the distance of about four hun¬ 
dred feet from the shore, and there lay to, with 
their vessels In a single row, the prows facing 
the land, and with the fighting-men upon the 
decks accoutred as if for war, while the king 
sailed along in the open space between the 
ships and the shore, and so reviewed the fleet. 

101. Now after Xerxes had sailed down the 
whole line and was gone ashore, he sent for 
Demaratus the son of Ariston, who had ac¬ 
companied him in his march upon Greece, and 
bespake him thus;— 

“Demaratus, it is my pleasure at this time to 
ask thee certain things which I wish to know. 
Thou art a Greek, and, as I hear from the oth¬ 
er Greeks with whom I converse, no less than 
from thine own lips, thou art a native of a city 
which is not the meanest or the weakest in 
their land. Tell me, therefore, what thinkest 
thou.^ Will the Greeks lift a hand against us.^ 
Mine own judgment is, that even if all the 
Greeks and all the barbarians of the West were 
gathered together in one place, they would not 
be able to abide my onset, not being really of 
one mind. But I would fain know what thou 
thinkest hereon.” 

Thus Xerxes questioned; and the other re¬ 
plied in his turn,—“O king! is it thy will that 
I give thee a true answer, or dost thou wish 
for a pleasant one.!^” 

Then the king bade him speak the plain 
truth, and promised that he would not on that 
account hold him in less favour than hereto¬ 
fore. 

102. So Demaratus, when he heard the 
promise, spake as follows:— 

“O king! since thou biddest me at all risks 
speak the truth, and not say what will one day 
prove me to have lied to thee, thus I answer. 
Want has at all times been a fellow-dweller 
with us in our land, while Valour is an ally 
whom we have gained by dint of wisdom and 
strict laws. Her aid enables us to drive out 




97-io6] the history 233 


want and escape thraldom. Brave are all the 
Greeks who dwell in any Dorian land; but 
what I am about to say docs not concern all, 
but only the Lacedxmonians. First then, come 
what may, they will never accept thy terms, 
which would reduce Greece to slavery; and 
further, they are sure to join battle with thee, 
though all the rest of the Greeks should sub¬ 
mit to thy will. As for their numbers, do not 
ask how many they are, that their resistance 
should be a possible thing; for if a thousand of 
them should take the field, they will meet thee 
in battle, and so will any number, be it less 
than this, or be it more.” 

103. When Xerxes heard this answer of De- 
maratus, he laughed and answered:— 

‘‘What wild words, Demaratus! A thousand 
men join battle with such an army as this! 
Come then, wilt thou—wTo wert once, as thou 
sayest, their king—engage to fight this very 
day with ten men.^ I trow not. And yet, if all 
thy fellow-citizens be indeed such as thou say¬ 
est they are, thou oughtest, as their king, by 
thine own country’s usages, to be ready to 
fight with twice the number. If then each one 
of them be a match for ten of my soldiers, I 
may well call upon thee to be a match for 
twenty. So wouldest thou assure the truth of 
what thou hast now said. If, how'ever, you 
Greeks, who vaunt yourselves so much, are of 
a truth men like those whom I have seen about 
my court, as thyself, Demaratus, and the others 
with whom I am wont to converse—if, I say, 
you are really men of this sort and size, how is 
the speech that thou hast uttered more than a 
mere empty boast For, to go to the very verge 
of likelihood—how could a thousand men, or 
ten thousand, or even fifty thousand, particu¬ 
larly if they were all alike free, and not under 
one lord—how could such a force, I say, stand 
against an army like mine.^ Let them be five 
thousand, and we shall have more than a 
thousand men to each one of theirs. If, indeed, 
like our troops, they had a single master, their 
fear of him might make them courageous be¬ 
yond their natural bent; or they might be 
urged by lashes against an enemy which far 
outnumbered them. But left to their own free 
choice, assuredly they will act differently. For 
mine own part, I believe, that if the Greeks 
had to contend with the Persians only, and the 
numbers were equal on both sides, the Greeks 
would find it hard to stand their ground. We 
too have among us such men as those of whom 
thou spakest—not many indeed, but still we 
possess a few. For instance, some of my body¬ 


guard would be willing to engage singly with 
three Greeks. But this thou didst not know; 
and therefore it was thou talkedst so foolishly.” 

104. Demaratus answered him—‘‘I knew, 
O king! at the outset, that if I told thee the 
truth, my speech vv'ould displease thine ears. 
But as thou didst require me to answer thee 
with all possible truthfulness, I informed thee 
what the Spartans will do. And in this I spake 
not from any love that I bear them—for none 
knows better than thou what my love towards 
them is likely to be at the present time, when 
they have robbed me of my rank and my an¬ 
cestral honours, and made me a homeless ex¬ 
ile, whom thy father did receive, bestowing on 
me both shelter and sustenance. What likeli¬ 
hood is there that a man of understanding 
should be unthankful for kindness shown him, 
and not cherish it in his heart? For mine own 
self, I pretend not to cope with ten men, nor 
with two—nay, had I the choice, I would 
rather not fight even with one. But, if need 
appeared, or if there were any great cause 
urging me on, I would contend with right 
good will against one of those persons who 
hoast themselves a match for any three Greeks. 
So likewise the Lacedaemonians, when they 
fight singly, are as good men as any in the 
world, and when they fight in a body, are the 
bravest of all. For though they be freemen, they 
are not in all respects free; Law is the master 
whom they own; and this master they fear 
more than thy subjects fear thee. Whatever he 
commands they do; and his commandment is 
always the same: it forbids them to flee in bat¬ 
tle, whatever the number of their foes, and 
requires them to stand firm, and either to con¬ 
quer or die. If in these words, O king! I seem 
to thee to speak foolishly, I am content from 
this time forward evermore to hold my peace. 
I had not now spoken unless compelled by thee. 
Certes, I pray that all may turn out according 
to thy wishes.” 

105. Such was the answer of Demaratus; 
and Xerxes was not angry with him at all, but 
only laughed, and sent him away with words 
of kindness. 

After this interview, and after he had made 
Mascames the son of Megadostes governor of 
Doriscus, setting aside the governor appointed 
by Darius, Xerxes started with his army, and 
marched upon Greece through Thrace. 

106. This man, Mascames, whom he left be¬ 
hind him, was a person of such merit that gifts 
were sent him yearly by the king as a special 
favour, because he excelled all the other gov- 


234 HERODOTUS [Book vii 


ernors that had been appointed either by Xer¬ 
xes or by Darius. In like manner, Artaxerxes, 
the son of Xerxes, sent gifts yearly to the de¬ 
scendants of Mascames. Persian governors had 
been established in Thrace and about the Hel¬ 
lespont before the march of Xerxes began; but 
these persons, after the expedition was over, 
were all driven from their towns by the 
Greeks, except the governor of Doriscus: no 
one succeeded in driving out Mascames, 
though many made the attempt. For this rea¬ 
son the gifts are sent him every year by the 
king who reigns over the Persians. 

107. Of the other governors whom the 
Greeks drove out, there was not one who, in 
the judgment of Xerxes, showed himself a 
brave man, excepting Boges, the governor of 
E'lon. Him Xerxes never could praise enough; 
and such of his sons as were left in Persia, and 
survived their father, he very specially hon¬ 
oured. And of a truth this Boges was worthy of 
great commendation; for when he was be¬ 
sieged by the Athenians under Cimon, the son 
of Miltiades, and it was open to him to retire 
from the city upon terms, and return to Asia, 
he refused, because he feared the king might 
think he had played the coward to save his 
own life, wherefore, instead of surrendering, 
he held out to the last extremity. When all the 
food in the fortress was gone, he raised a vast 
funeral pile, slew his children, his wife, his 
concubines, and his household slaves, and cast 
them all into the flames. Then, collecting what¬ 
ever gold and silver there was in the place, he 
flung it from the walls into the Strymon; and, 
when that was done, to crown all, he himself 
leaped into the fire. For this action Boges is 
with reason praised by the Persians even at the 
present day. 

108. Xerxes, as I have said, pursued his 
march from Doriscus against Greece; and on 
his way he forced all the nations through 
which he passed to take part in the expedition. 
For the whole country as far as the frontiers of 
Thessaly had been (as I have already shown) 
enslaved and made tributary to the king by 
the conquests of Megabazus, and, more lately, 
of Mardonius. And first, after leaving Doris¬ 
cus, Xerxes passed the Samothracian fortresses, 
whereof Mesambria is the farthermost as one 
goes toward the west. The next city is Stryme, 
which belongs to Thasos. Midway between it 
and Mesambria flows the river Lissus, which 
did not suffice to furnish water for the army, 
but was drunk up and failed. This region was 
formerly called Gallaka; now it bears the 


name of Briantica; but in strict truth it like¬ 
wise is really Ciconian. 

109. After crossing the dry channel of the 
Lissus, Xerxes passed the Grecian cities of 
Maroneia, Dicxa, and Abdera, and likewise 
the famous lakes which are in their neighbour¬ 
hood, Lake Ismaris between Maroneia and 
Stryme, and Lake Bistonis near Dicsea, which 
receives the waters of two rivers, the Travus 
and the Compsatus. Near Abdera there was 
no famous lake for him to pass; but he crossed 
the river Nestus, which there reaches the sea. 
Proceeding further upon his way, he passed | 
by several continental cities, one of them pos- | 
sessing a lake nearly thirty furlongs in circuit, 
full of fish, and very salt, of which the sump- 
ter-beasts only drank, and which they drained > 
dry. The name of this city was Pistyrus. All 
these towns, which were Grecian, and lay 
upon the coast, Xerxes kept upon his left hand 
as he passed along. 

no. The following are the Thracian tribes 
through whose country he marched: the P^eti, I 
the Ciconians, the Bistonians, the Sapseans, the I 
Dersaeans, the Edonians, and the Satrae. Some 
of these dwelt by the sea, and furnished ships 
to the king’s fleet; while others lived in the 
more inland parts, and of these all the tribes 1 
which I have mentioned, except the Satrae, 
were forced to serve on foot. 

111. The Satr^e, so far as our knowledge 
goes, have never yet been brought under by 
any one, but continue to this day a free and 
unconquered people, unlike the other Thraci¬ 
ans. They dwell amid lofty mountains clothed , 
with forests of different trees and capped with I 
snow, and are very valiant in fight. They are I 
the Thracians who have an oracle of Bacchus 
in their country, which is situated upon their 
highest mountain-range. The Bessi, a Satrian > 
race, deliver the oracles; but the prophet, as at 
Delphi, is a woman; and her answers are not 
harder to read. 

112. When Xerxes had passed through the 
region mentioned above, he came next to the 
Pierian fortresses, one of which is called Pha- 
gres, and another Pergamus. Here his line of 
march lay close by the walls, with the long 
high range of Pangaeum upon his right, a tract 
in which there are mines both of gold and sil¬ 
ver, some worked by the Pierians and Odo- 
mantians, but tbe greater part by the Satrse. 

113. Xerxes then marched through the 
country of the Paeonian tribes—the Doberians 
and the Paeopla^—which lay to the north of 
Pangaeum, and, advancing westward, reached 





107-120 ] 

the river Strymon and the city Eion, whereof 
Boges, of whom I spoke a short time ago, and 
who was then still alive, was governor. The 
tract of land lying about Mount Pangxum is 
called Phyllis; on the west it reaches to the riv¬ 
er Angites, which flows into the Strymon, and 
on the south to the Strymon itself, where at this 
time the Magi were sacrificing white horses to 
make the stream favourable. 

114. After propitiating the stream by these 
and many other magical ceremonies, the Per¬ 
sians crossed the Strymon, by bridges made 
before their arrival, at a place called “The 
Nine Ways,” which was in the territory of 
the Edonians. And when they learnt that the 
name of the place was “The Nine Ways,’’ they 
took nine of the youths of the land and as many 
of their maidens, and buried them alive on 
the spot. Burying alive is a Persian custom. I 
have heard that Amestris, the wife of Xerxes, 
in her old age buried alive seven pairs of Per¬ 
sian youths, sons of illustrious men, as a thank- 
offering to the god who is supposed to dwell 
underneath the earth. 

115. From the Strymon the army, proceed¬ 
ing westward, came to a strip of shore, on 
which there stands the Grecian town of Argi- 
lus. This shore, and the whole tract above it, 
is called Bisaltia. Passing this, and keeping on 
the left hand the Ciulf of Posideium, Xerxes 
crossed the Sylean plain, as it is called, and 
passing by Stagirus, a Greek city, came to 
Acanthus. The inhabitants of these parts, as 
well as those who dwelt about Mount Pangae- 
um, were forced to join the armament, like 
those others of whom I spoke liefore; the dwell¬ 
ers along the coast being made to serve in the 
fleet, while those who lived more inland had 
to follow with the land forces. The road which 
the army of Xerxes took remains to this day 
untouched; the Thracians neither plough nor 
sow it, but hold it in great honour. 

116. On reaching Acanthus, the Persian 
king, seeing the great zeal of the Acanthians 
for his service, and hearing what had been 
done about the cutting, took them into the 
number of his sworn friends, sent them as a 
present a Median dress, and besides commend¬ 
ed them highly. 

117. It was while he remained here that 
Artachaees, who presided over the canal, a 
man in high repute with Xerxes, and by birth 
an Achsemenid, who was moreover the tallest 
of all the Persians, being only four fingers short 
of five cubits, royal measure, and who had a 
stronger voice than any other man in the 


235 

world, fell sick and died. Xerxes therefore, 
who was greatly afflicted at the mischance, car¬ 
ried him to the tomb and buried him with all 
magnificence; while the whole army helped 
to raise a mound over his grave. The Acanthi¬ 
ans, in obedience to an oracle, offer sacrifice to 
this Artachares as a hero, invoking him in their 
prayers by name. But King Xerxes sorrowed 
greatly over his death. 

118. Now the Greeks who had to feed the 
army, and to entertain Xerxes, were brought 
thereby to the very extremity of distress, inso¬ 
much that some of them were forced even to 
forsake house and home. When the Thasians 
received and feasted the host, on account of 
their possessions upon the mainland. Anti¬ 
pater, the son of Orges, one of the citizens of 
best repute, and the man to whom the business 
was assigned, proved that the cost of the meal 
was four hundred talents of silver. 

ti(). And estimates almost to the same 
amount were made by the superintendents in 
other cities. For the entertainment, which had 
been ordered long beforehand and was reck¬ 
oned to be of much consequence, was, in the 
manner of it, such as I will now describe. No 
sooner did the heralds who brought the orders 
give their message, than in every city the in¬ 
habitants made a division of their stores of 
corn, and proceeded to grind flour of wheat 
and of barley for many months together. Be¬ 
sides this, they purchased the best cattle that 
they could find, and fattened them; and fed 
poultry and water-fowl in ponds and build¬ 
ings, to be in readiness for the army; while 
they likewise prepared gold and silver vases 
and drinking-cups, and whatsoever else is 
needed for the service of the table. These last 
preparations were made for the king only, and 
those who sat at meat with him; for the rest 
of the army nothing was made ready beyond 
the food for which orders had been given. On 
the arrival of the Persians, a tent ready pitched 
for the purpose received Xerxes, who took his 
rest therein, while the soldiers remained un¬ 
der the open heaven. When the dinner hour 
came, great was the toil of those who enter¬ 
tained the army; while the guests ate their fill, 
and then, after passing the night at the place, 
tore' down the royal tent next morning, and 
seizing its contents, carried them all off, leav¬ 
ing nothing behind. 

120. On one of these occasions Megacreon 
of Abdera wittily recommended his country¬ 
men “to go to the temples in a body, men and 
women alike, and there take their station as 


THE HISTORY 


236 HERODOTUS [Book vii 


suppliants, and beseech the gods that they 
would in future always spare them one-half of 
the woes which might threaten their peace— 
thanking them at the same time very warmly 
for their past goodness in that they had caused 
Xerxes to be content with one meal in the 
day.” For had the order been to provide break¬ 
fast for the king as well as dinner, the Ab- 
derites must either have fled before Xerxes 
came, or, if they awaited his coming, have been 
brought to absolute ruin. As it was, the na¬ 
tions, though sufl[ering heavy pressure, com¬ 
plied nevertheless with the directions that had 
been given. 

121. At Acanthus Xerxes separated from his 
fleet, bidding the captains sail on ahead and 
await his coming at Therma, on the Thermaic 
Gulf, the place from which the bay takes its 
name. Through this town lay, he understood, 
his shortest road. Previously, his order of 
march had been the following:—from Doris- 
cus to Acanthus his land force had proceeded 
in three bodies, one of which took the way 
along the sea-shore in company with the fleet, 
and was commanded by Mardonius and Mas- 
istes, while another pursued an inland track 
under Tritanta’chmes and Gergis; the third, 
with which was Xerxes himselt marching mid¬ 
way between the other two, and having for its 
leaders Smerdomenes and Megabyzus. 

122. The fleet, therefore, after leaving the 
king, sailed through the channel which had 
been cut for it by Mount Athos, and came into 
the bay whereon lie the cities of Assa, Pilorus, 
Singus, and Sarta; from all which it received 
contingents. Thence it stood on for the Ther¬ 
maic Gulf, and rounding Cape Ampelus, the 
promontory of the Toronaeans, passed the 
Grecian cities Torone, Cialepsus, Sermyla, 
Mecyberna, and Olynthus, receiving from 
each a number of ships and men. This region 
is called Sithonia. 

123. From Cape Ampelus the fleet stretched 
across by a short course to Cape Canastraeum, 
which is the point of the peninsula of Pallene 
that runs out farthest into the sea, and gath¬ 
ered fresh supplies of ships and men from Poti- 
daea, Aphytis, Neapolis, ^ga, Therambus, Sci- 
one, Mende, and Sane. These are the cities of 
the tract called anciently Phlegra, but now 
Pallene. Hence they again followed the coast, 
still advancing towards the place appointed by 
the king, and had accessions from all the cities 
that lie near Pallene, and border on the Ther¬ 
maic Gulf, whereof the names are Lipaxus, 
Combreia, Lisae, Gigonus, Campsa, Smila, 


and iEnea. The tract where these towns lie 
still retains its old name of Crossaea. After pass- ■ 
ing .T^nea, the city which I last named, the ^ 
fleet found itself arrived in the Thermaic Gulf, 1 
off the land of Mygdonia. And so at length 
they reached Therma, the appointed place, and If 
came likewise to Sindus and Chalestra upon I 
the river Axius, which separates Bottiaea from L 
Mygdonia. Bottiaea has a scanty sea-board, I 
which is occupied by the two cities Ichnae and f 
Pella. I 

124. So the fleet anchored off the Axius, and | 
off Therma, and the towns that lay between, ' 
waiting the king’s coming. Xerxes meanwhile I 
with his land force left Acanthus, and started f 
for Therma, taking his way across the land. 
This road led him through Paconia and Cres- 
tonia to the river Echeidorus, which rising in 
the country of the Crestonians, flows through 
Mygdonia, and reaches the sea near the marsh 
upon the Axius. 

125. Upon this march the camels that car¬ 
ried the provisions of the army were set upon 
by lions, which left their lairs and came down ' 
by night, but spared the men and the sumpter- i 
beasts, while they made the camels their prey, r 
I marvel what may have been the cause which 
compelled the lions to leave the other animals 
untouched and attack the camels, when they 
had never seen that beast before, nor had any 
experience of it. 

126. That whole region is full of lions and 
wild bulls, with gigantic horns, which are 
brought into (xreece. The lions are confined 
within the tract lying between the river Nestus 
(which flows through Abdera) on the one side, 
and the Acheloiis (which waters Acarnania) 
on the other. No one ever sees a lion in the 
fore part of Europe east of the Nestus, nor 
through the entire continent west of the Ache- 
loiis; but in the space between these bounds 
lions are found. 

127. On reaching Therma Xerxes halted his 
army, which encamped along the coast, begin¬ 
ning at the city of Therma in Mygdonia, and 
stretching out as far as the rivers Lydias and 
Haliacmon, two streams which, mingling their 
waters in one, form the boundary between Bot- 
ticTa and Macedonia. Such was the extent of 
country through which the barbarians en- 
campeff The rivers here mentioned were all 
of them sufficient to supply the troops, except 
the Echeidorus, which was drunk dry. 

128. From Therma Xerxes beheld the Thes¬ 
salian mountains, Olympus and Ossa, which 
are of a wonderful height. Here, learning that 






,2I-I?3l the history 237 


there lay between these mountains a narrow 
gorge through which the river Peneus ran, and 
where there was a road that gave an entrance 
into Thessaly, he formed the wish to go by sea 
himself, and examine the mouth of the river. 
His design was to lead his army by the upper 
road through the country of the inland Nlace- 
donians, and so to enter Perrhsbia, and come 
down by the city of (Jonnus; for he was told 
that that way was the most secure. No sooner 
therefore had he formed this wish than he act¬ 
ed accordingly. Embarking, as was his wont on 
all such occasions, aboard a Sidonian vessel, he 
gave the signal to the rest of the fleet to get un¬ 
der weigh, and quitting his land army, set sail 
and proceeded to the Peneus. Here the view ol 
the mouth caused him to wonder greatly; and 
sending for his guides, he asked them whether 
it were possible to turn the course ol the 
stream, and make it reach the sea at any other 
point. 

129. Now there is a tradition that Thessaly 
was in ancient times a lake, shut in on every 
side by huge hills. Ossa and Pelion—ranges 
which join at the foot—do in fact inclose it 
upon the east, while Olympus forms a barrier 
upon the north, Pindus upon the west, aiul 
Othrys towards the south. The tract containeil 
within these mountains, which is a deep basin, 
is called Thessaly. Many rivers pour their wa¬ 
ters into it; but five of them are ot more note 
than the rest, namely, the Peneus, the Api- 
danus, the Onochonus, the Enipeus, and the 
Pamisus. These streams flow down from the 
mountains which surround Thessaly, aiul, 
meeting in the plain, mingle their waters to 
gether, and discharge themselves into the sea 
by a single outlet, which is a gorge of extreme 
narrowness. After the junction all the other 
names disappear, and the river is known as the 
Peneus. It is said that of old the gorge which al¬ 
lows the waters an outlet did not exist; accord¬ 
ingly the rivers, which were then, as well as 
the Lake Boebeis, without names, but flowed 
with as much water as at present, made Thes¬ 
saly a sea. The Thessalians tell us that the 
gorge through which the water escapes was 
caused by Neptune; and this is likely enough; 
at least any man who believes that Neptune 
causes earthquakes, and that chasms so pro¬ 
duced are his handiwork, would say, upon 
seeing this rent, that Neptune did it. For it 
plainly appeared to me that the hills had been 
torn asunder by an earthquake. 

130. When Xerxes therefore asked the 
guides if there were any other outlet bv which 


the waters could reach the sea, they, being men 
well acquainted with the nature of their coun¬ 
try, made answer:— 

“O king! there is no other passage by which 
this stream can empty itself into the sea save 
that which thine eye beholds. For Thessaly is 
girt about with a circlet of hills.” 

Xerxes is said to have observed upon this— 

“Wise men truly are they of Thessaly, and 
good reason had they to change their minds in 
time and consult for their own safety. For, to 
pass by others matters, they must have felt that 
they lived in a country which may easily be 
brought under and subdued. Nothing more is 
needed than to turn the river upon their lands 
by an embankment which should fill up the 
gorge and force the stream from its present 
channel, and lo' all Thessaly, except the moun 
lams, would at once be laid under water.” 

I'he king aimed in this speech at the sons 
ol .\leuas, who were Thessalians, and had 
been the brst ol all the (Leeks to make submis 
bion to him. He thought that they had made 
their Iriendly oilers in the name ol the whole 
people. So Xerxes, when he had viewed the 
place, aiul made the above speech, went back 
to Therma. 

1^1. The stay ol Xerxes in Pieria lasted tor 
several days, during which a third part of his 
army was employetl in cutting dow n the woods 
on the Macedonian mountain-range to give his 
forces free passage into Perrhsbia. At this time 
the heralds who had been sent into Greece to 
recjuire earth tor the king returned to the 
camp, some of them empty-handed, others 
with earth and water. 

132. Among the number of those from 
whom earth and water were brought were the 
Thessalians, Dolopians, Enianians, Perrha: 
bians, Locrians, Magnetians, Malians, Achae 
ans ol Phthiotis, Thebans, and Boeotians gen 
erally, except those of Plata^a and Thespia*. 
These are the nations against whom the 
Greeks that had taken up arms to resist the 
barbarians swore the oath, which ran thus— 
“From all those of Greek blood who delivered 
themselves up to the Persians without neces¬ 
sity, when their aftairs were in good condition, 
we will take a tithe of their goods, and give it 
to the god at Delphi.” So ran the words of the 
Greek oath. 

133. King Xerxes had sent no heralds either 
to Athens or Sparta to ask earth and water, for 
a reason which I will now relate. When Darius 
some time before sent messengers for the same 
purpose, they were thrown, at Athens, into 


238 HERODOTUS [Book vii 


the pit of punishment, at Sparta into a well, 
and bidden to take therefrom earth and water 
for themselves, and carry it to their king. On 
this account Xerxes did not send to ask them. 
What calamity came upon the Athenians to 
punish them for their treatment of the heralds 
I cannot say, unless it were the laying waste of 
their city and territory; but that I believe was 
not on account of this crime. 

134. On the Lacedaemonians, however, the 
wrath of Talthybius, Agamemnon’s herald, 
fell with violence. Talthybius has a temple at 
Sparta; and his descendants, who are called 
Talthybiadae, still live there, and have the 
privilege of being the only persons who dis¬ 
charge the office of herald. When therefore the 
Spartans had done the deed of which we 
speak, the victims at their sacrifices failed to 
give good tokens; and this failure lasted for a 
very long time. Then the Spartans were 
troubled; and, regarding what had befallen 
them as a grievous calamity, they held fre¬ 
quent assemblies of the people, and made proc¬ 
lamation through the town, “Was any Lace¬ 
daemonian willing to give his life for Sparta?” 
Upon this two Spartans, Sperthias, the son of 
Aneristus, and Bulis, the son of Nicolaus, both 
men of noble birth, and among the wealthiest 
in the place, came forward and freely offered 
themselves as an atonement to Xerxes for the 
heralds of Darius slain at Sparta. So the Spar¬ 
tans sent them away to the Medes to undergo 
death. 

135. Nor is the courage which these men 
hereby displayed alone worthy of wonder; but 
so likewise are the following speeches which 
were made by them. On their road to Susa 
they presented themselves before Hydarnes. 
This Hydarnes was a Persian by birth, and had 
the command of all the nations that dwelt 
along the sea-coast of Asia. He accordingly 
showed them hospitality, and invited them to 
a banquet, where, as they feasted, he said to 
them:— 

“Men of Lacedaemon, why will ye not con¬ 
sent to be friends with the king? Ye have but 
to look at me and my fortune to see that the 
king knows well how to honour merit. In like 
manner ye yourselves, were ye to make your 
submission to him, would receive at his hands, 
seeing that he deems you men of merit, some 
government in Greece.” 

“Hydarnes,” they answered, “thou art a one¬ 
sided counsellor. Thou hast experience of 
half the matter; but the other half is beyond 
thy knowledge. A slave’s life thou understand- 


est; but, never having tasted liberty, thou canst 
not tell whether it be sweet or no. Ah! hadst 
thou known what freedom is, thou wouldst 
have bidden us fight for it, not with the spear 
only, but with the battle-axe.” 

So they answered Hydarnes. 

136. And afterwards, when they were come 
to Susa into the king’s presence, and the guards 
ordered them to fall down and do obeisance, 
and went so far as to use force to compel them, 
they refused, and said they would never do 
any such thing, even were their heads thrust 
down to the ground; for it was not their cus¬ 
tom to worship men, and they had not come to 
Persia for that purpose. So they fought off the 
ceremony; and having done so, addressed the 
king in words much like the following:— 

“O king of the Medes! the Laceda*monians 
have sent us hither, in the place of those her¬ 
alds of thine who were slain in Sparta, to make 
atonement to thee on their account.” 

Then Xerxes answered with true greatness 
of soul “that he would not act like the Lacede¬ 
monians, who, by killing the heralds, had 
broken the laws which all men hold in com¬ 
mon. As he had blamed such conduct in them, 
he would never be guilty of it himself. And 
besides, he did not wish, by putting the two 
men to death, to free the Lacedemonians 
from the stain of their former outrage.” 

137. This conduct on the part of the Spar¬ 
tans caused the anger of Talthybius to cease 
for a while, notwithstanding that Sperthias 
and Bulis returned home alive. But many 
years afterwards it awoke once more, as the 
Lacedemonians themselves declare, during the 
war between the Pelo[X)nnesians and the 
Athenians. 

In my judgment this was a case wherein the 
hand of Heaven w'as most plainly manifest. 
That the wrath of Talthybius should have 
fallen upon ambassadors and not slacked till 
it had full vent, so much justice required; but 
that it should have come upon the sons of the 
very men who were sent up to the Persian 
king on its account—upon Nicolaus, the son 
of Bulis, and Aneristus, the son of Sperthias 
(the same who carried off fishermen from 
Tiryns, when cruising in a well-manned mer¬ 
chant-ship)—this does seem to me to be plain¬ 
ly a supernatural circumstance. Yet certain it 
is that these two men, having been sent to 
Asia as ambassadors by the Lacedaemonians, 
were betrayed by Sitalces, the son of Teres, 
king of Thrace, and Nymphodorus, the son of 
Pythes, a native of Abdera, and being made 




i34-'-}> 1 

prisoners at Bisanthc, upon the Hellespont, 
were conveyed to Attica, and there put to 
death by the Athenians, at the same time as 
Aristeas, the son of Adeimantus, the Corin¬ 
thian. All this happened, however, very many 
years after the expedition of Xerxes. 

138. To return, however, to my main sub¬ 
ject—the expedition of the Persian king, 
though it was in name directed against Athens, 
threatened really the whole of Greece. And of 
this the Greeks were aware some time before; 
but they did not all view the matter in the 
same light. Some of them had given the Per¬ 
sian earth and water, and were bold on this 
account, deeming themselves thereby secured 
against sulTering hurt from the barbarian 
army; while others, who had refused compli¬ 
ance, were thrown into extreme alarm. For 
whereas they considered all the ships in Greece 
too few to engage the enemy, it was plain that 
the greater number of states would take no 
part in the war, but warmly favoured the 
Medes. 

139. And here I feel constrained to deliver 
an opinion, which most men, I know, will mis- 
like, but which, as it seems to me to be true, I 
am determined not to withhold. Had the 
Athenians, from fear of the approaching dan¬ 
ger, quitted their country, or had they with¬ 
out quitting it submitted to the power ot Xer¬ 
xes, there would certainly have been no at¬ 
tempt to resist the Persians by sea; in which 
case the course of events by land would have 
been the following. Though the Peloponnesi¬ 
ans might have carried ever so many breast¬ 
works across the Isthmus, yet their allies would 
have fallen off from the Lacedicmonians, not 
by voluntary desertion, but because town after 
town must have been taken by the fleet of the 
barbarians; and so the Lacedaemonians would 
at last have stood alone, and, standing alone, 
would have displayed prodigies of valour and 
died nobly. Either they would have done thus, 
or else, before it came to that extremity, seeing 
one Greek state after another embrace the 
cause of the Medes, they would have come to 
terms with King Xerxes—and thus, either 
way Greece would have been brought under 
Persia. For I cannot understand of what pos¬ 
sible use the walls across the Isthmus could 
have been, if the king had had the mastery of 
the sea. If then a man should now say that the 
Athenians were the saviours of Greece, he 
would not exceed the truth. For they truly held 
the scales; and whichever side they espoused 
must have carried the day. They too it was 


239 

who, when they had determined to maintain 
the freedom of (Greece, roused up that portion 
of the Greek nation which had not gone over 
to the Medes; and so, next to the gods, they re¬ 
pulsed the invader. Even the terrible oracles 
which reached them from Delphi, and struck 
fear into their hearts, failed to persuade them 
to fly from Greece. They had the courage to 
remain faithful to their land, and await the 
coming of the foe. 

140. When the Athenians, anxious to con 
suit the oracle, sent their messengers to Delphi, 
hardly had the envoys completed the custom 
ary rites about the sacred precinct, and taken 
their seats inside the sanctuary of the god, 
when the Pythoness, Aristonice by name, thus 
prophesied— 

Wretches, why sit ye here? Fly, fly to the ends of 
creation , 

(Juitting your homes, and the crags which your 
city crowns with her circlet. 

Neither the head, nor the body is firm in its 
place, nor at bottom 

Firm the feet, nor the hands, nor resteth the 
middle uninpiFd. 

All—all ruined and lost. Since fire, and impetu¬ 
ous .ties. 

Speeding along in a Syrian chariot, hastes to de¬ 
stroy her. 

Not alone shall thou suffer; full many the towers 
he will level. 

Many the shrines of the gods he will give to a 
fiery destruction. 

Fven now they stand with darl{ sweat horribly 
dripping, 

Trembling and quaking for fear; and lol from 
the high roofs trichleth 

Blacky blood, sign prophetic of hard distresses im 
pending. 

Get ye away from the temple; and brood on the 
ills that await ye! 

141. When the Athenian messengers heard 
this reply, they were filled with the deepest 
affliction: whereupon Timon, the son of An- 
drobulus, one of the men of most mark among 
the Delphians, seeing how utterly cast down 
they were at the gloomy prophecy, advised 
them to take an olive-branch, and entering the 
sanctuary again, consult the oracle as suppli¬ 
ants. The Athenians followed this advice, and 
going in once more, said—“O king! we pray 
thee reverence these boughs of supplication 
which we bear in our hands, and deliver to us 
something more comforting concerning our 
country. Else we will not leave thy sanctuary, 
but will stay here till we die.” Upon this the 
priestess gave them a second answer, which 
was the following:— 


THE HISTORY 


240 HERODOTUS [Book vii 


Pallas has not been able to soften the lord of 
Olympus, 

Though she has often prayed him, and urged him 
with excellent counsel. 

Yet once more I address thee in words than ada¬ 
mant firmer. 

When the foe shall have tal{en whatever the limit 
of Cecrops 

Holds within it, and all which divine Cithceron 
shelters. 

Then far-seeing fove grants this to the prayers of 
Athefie; 

Safe shall the wooden wall continue for thee and 
thy children. 

Wait not the tramp of the horse, nor the footmen 
mightily moving 

Over the land, but turn your bac\ to the foe, and 
retire ye. 

Yet shall a day arrive when ye shall meet him in 
battle. 

Holy Salamis, thou shall destroy the offspring of 
women. 

When men scatter the seed, or when they gather 
the harvest. 

142. This answer seemed, as indeed it was, 
gentler than the former one; so the envoys 
wrote it down, and went hack with it to Ath¬ 
ens. When, however, upon their arrival, they 
produced it before the people, and inquiry be¬ 
gan to be made into its true meaning, many 
and various were the interpretations which 
men put on it; two, more especially, seemed to 
be directly opposed to one another. Certain of 
the old men were of opinion that the god 
meant to tell them the citadel would escape; 
for this was anciently defended by a palisade; 
and they supposed that barrier to be the 
“wooden walk’ of the oracle. Others main¬ 
tained that the fleet was what the god pointed 
at; and their advice was that nothing should 
be thought of except the ships, which had best 
be at once got ready. Still such as said the 
“wooden wall” meant the fleet, were perplexed 
by the last two lines of the oracle— 

Holy Salamis, thou shall destroy the offspring of 
women. 

When men scatter the seed, or when they gather 
the harvest. 

These words caused great disturbance among 
those who took the wooden wall to be the 
ships; since the interpreters understood them 
to mean that, if they made preparations for a 
sea-fight, they would sufier a defeat off Sala¬ 
mis. 

143. Now there was at Athens a man who 
had lately made his way into the first rank of 
citizens: his true name was Themistocles; but 
he was known more generally as the son of 


Neocles. This man came forward and said 
that the interpreters had not explained the or¬ 
acle altogether aright—“for if,” he argued, 
“the clause in question had really respected the 
Athenians, it would not have been expressed 
so mildly; the phrase used would have been 
‘Luckless Salamis,' rather than ‘Holy Salamis,' 
had those to whom the island belonged been 
about to perish in its neighbourhood. Rightly 
taken, the response of the god threatened the 
enemy, much more than the Athenians.” He 
therefore counselled his countrymen to make 
ready to fight on board their ships, since they 
were the wooden wall in which the god told 
them to trust. When Themistocles had thus 
cleared the matter, the Athenians embraced his 
view, preferring it to that of the interpreters. 
The advice of these last had been against en¬ 
gaging in a sea-fight; “all the Athenians could 
do,” they said, “was, without lifting a hand in 
their defence, to quit Attica, and make a set¬ 
tlement in some other country.” 

144. Themistocles had before this given a 
counsel which prevailed very seasonably. The 
Athenians, having a large sum of money in 
their treasury, the produce of the mines at 
Laureium, were about to share it among the 
full-grown citizens, who would have received 
ten drachmas apiece, when Themistocles per¬ 
suaded them to forbear the distribution, and 
build with the money two hundred ships, to 
help them in their war against the Eginetans. 
It was the breaking out of the Eginetan war 
which was at this time the saving of Greece; 
for hereby were the Athenians forced to be¬ 
come a maritime power. The new ships were 
not used for the purpose for which they had 
been built, but became a help to Greece in her 
hour of need. And the Athenians had not only 
these vessels ready before the war, but they 
likewise set to work to build more; while they 
determined, in a council which was held after 
the debate upon the oracle, that, according to 
the advice of the god, they would embark their 
whole force aboard their ships, and, with such 
Greeks as chose to join them, give battle to 
the barbarian invader. Such, then, were the 
oracles which had been received by the Athen¬ 
ians. 

145. The Greeks who were well affected to 
the Grecian cause, having assembled in one 
place, and there consulted together, and inter¬ 
changed pledges with each other, agreed that, 
before any other step was taken, the feuds and 
enmities which existed between the different 
nations should first of all be appeased. Many 







I 42 -M 9 ! the H 

such there were; hut one was of more impor¬ 
tance than the rest, namely, the war which was 
still J^oin^ on between the Athenians and the 
Eginctans. When this business was concluded, 
understanding that Xerxes had reached Sardis 
with his army, they resolved to despatch spies 
into Asia to take note of the king’s afTairs. At 
the same time they determined to send ambas¬ 
sadors to the Argives, and conclude a league 
with them against the Persians; while they 
likewise despatched messengers to Gelo, the 
son of Deinomenes, in Sicily, to the people of 
Corcyra, and to those of Crete, exhorting them 
to send help to Greece. Their wish was to 
unite, if possible, the entire Greek name in 
one, and so to bring all to join in tbe same 
plan of defence, inasmuch as the approaching 
dangers threatened all alike. Now the power 
of Gelo was said to be very great, far greater 
than that of any single Grecian people. 

146. So when these resolutions had been 
agreed upon, and the quarrels between the 
states made up, first of all they sent into Asia 
three men as spies. These men reached Sardis, 
and took note of the king’s forces, but, being 
discovered, were examined by order of the 
generals who commanded the land army, and, 
having been condemned to sufTer death, were 
led out to execution. Xerxes, however, when 
the news reached him, disapproving the sen¬ 
tence of the generals, sent some of his body¬ 
guard with instructions, if they found the spies 
still alive, to bring them into bis presence. The 
messengers found the spies alive, and brought 
them before the king, who, when he heard 
the purpose for which they had come, gave 
orders to his guards to take them round the 
camp, and show them all the footmen and all 
the horse, letting them gaze at everything to 
their hearts’ content; then, when they were 
satisfied, to send them away unharmed to 
whatever country they desired. 

147. For these orders Xerxes gave after¬ 
wards the following reasons. “Had the spies 
been put to death,” he said, “the Greeks would 
have continued ignorant of the vastness of his 
army, which surpassed the common report of 
it; while he would have done them a very 
small injury by killing three of their men. On 
the other hand, by the return of the spies to 
Greece, his power would become known; and 
the Greeks,” he expected, “would make sur¬ 
render of their freedom before he began his 
march, by which means his troops would be 
saved all the trouble of an expedition.” This 
reasoning was like to that which he used upon 


I STORY 2dl 

another occasion. While he was staying at 
Abydos, he saw some corn-ships, w hich were 
passing through the Hellespont from the Eux- 
ine, on their way to Egina and the Pelopon- 
nese. IIis attendants, hearing that they were 
the enemy’s, were ready to capture them, and 
looked to see when Xerxes would give the sig¬ 
nal. He, however, merely asked “whither the 
ships were bound and when they answered, 
“For thy foes, master, with corn on board,”— 
“We too are bound thither,” he rejoined, “la¬ 
den, among other things, with corn. What 
harm is it, if they carry our provisions for us?” 

So the spies, when they had seen everything, 
were dismissed, and came back to Europe. 

148. The Greeks who had banded them¬ 
selves together against the Persian king, after 
despatching the spies into Asia, sent next am¬ 
bassadors to Argos. The account which the 
Argives give of their own proceedings is the 
following. They say that they had information 
from the very first of the preparations which 
the barbarians were making against Greece. 
So, as they expected that the Greeks would 
come upon them for aid against the assailant, 
they sent envoys to Delphi to inquire of the 
god what it would be best for them to do in 
the matter. They had lost, not long before, six 
thousand citizens, who had been slain by the 
Laceda:monians under Cleomenes the son of 
Anaxandridas; which was the reason why they 
now sent to Delphi. When the Pythoness heard 
their question, she replied— 

Hated of all thy neighbors, beloved of the blessed 

Im mortals y 

Sit thou still, with thy lance drawn inward, pa¬ 
tiently watching; 

Wanly guard thine head, and the head will take 

care of the body. 

This prophecy had been given them some 
time before tbe envoys came; but still, when 
they afterwards arrived, it was permitted them 
to enter the council-house, and there deliver 
their message. And this answer was returned 
to their demands—“Argos is ready to do as ye 
require, if the Lacedaemonians will first make 
a truce for thirty years, and will further divide 
with Argos the leadership of the allied army. 
Although in strict right the whole command 
should be hers, she will be content to have the 
leadership divided equally.” 

149. Such, they say, was the reply made by 
the council, in spite of the oracle which for¬ 
bade them to enter into a league with the 
Greeks. For, while not without fear of disobey¬ 
ing the oracle, they were greatly desirous of 


242 HERODOTUS [Book vii 


obtaining a thirty years’ truce, to give time for 
their sons to grow to man’s estate. They re¬ 
flected, that if no such truce were concluded, 
and it should be their lot to suffer a second 
calamity at the hands of the Persians, it was 
likely they would fall hopelessly under the 
power of Sparta. But to the demands of the 
Argive council the Lacedaemonian envoys 
made answer—“They would bring before the 
people the question of concluding a truce. 
With regard to the leadership, they had re¬ 
ceived orders what to say, and the reply was 
that Sparta had two kings, Argos but one—it 
was not possible that either of the two Spar¬ 
tans should be stripped of his dignity—but 
they did not oppose the Argive king having 
one vote like each of them.” The Argives say 
that they could not brook this arrogance on 
the part of Sparta, and rather than yield one 
jot to it, they preferred to be under the rule of 
the barbarians. So they told the envoys to be 
gone, before sunset, from their territory, or 
they should be treated as enemies. 

150. Such is the account which is given of 
these matters by the Argives themselves. There 
is another story, which is told generally 
through Greece, of a dif 4 erent tenor. Xerxes, 
it is said, before he set forth on his expedition 
against Greece, sent a herald to Argos, who 
on his arrival spoke as follows:— 

“Men of Argos, King Xerxes speaks thus to 
you. We Persians deem that the Perses from 
whom we descend was the child of Perseus the 
son of Danae, and of Andromeda the daughter 
of Cepheus. Hereby it would seem that we 
come of your stock and lineage. So then it 
neither befits us to make war upon those from 
whom we spring; nor can it be right for you to 
fight, on behalf of others, against us. Your 
place is to keep quiet and hold yourself aloof. 
Only let matters proceed as I wish, and there 
is no people whom I shall have in higher es¬ 
teem than you.” 

This address, says the story, was highly val¬ 
ued by the Argives, who therefore at the first 
neither gave a promise to the Greeks nor yet 
put forward a demand. Afterwards, however, 
when the Greeks called upon them to give 
their aid, they made the claim which has been 
mentioned, because they knew well that the 
Lacedaemonians would never yield it, and so 
they would have a pretext for taking no part in 
the war. 

151. Some of the Greeks say that this ac¬ 
count agrees remarkably with what happened 
many years afterwards. Callias, the son of Hip- 


ponicus, and certain others with him, had gone 
up to Susa, the city of Memnon, as ambassa¬ 
dors of the Athenians, upon a business quite 
distinct from this. While they were there, it 
happened that the Argives likewise sent am¬ 
bassadors to Susa, to ask Artaxerxes, the son 
of Xerxes, “if the friendship which they had 
formed with his father still continued, or if he 
looked upon them as his enemies.^”—to which 
King Artaxerxes replied, “Most certainly it 
continues; and there is no city which I reckon 
more my friend than Argos.” 

152. For my own part I cannot positively 
say whether Xerxes did send the herald to Ar¬ 
gos or not; nor whether Argive ambassadors 
at Susa did really put this question to Arta¬ 
xerxes about the friendship between them and 
him; neither do I deliver any opinion here¬ 
upon other than that of the Argives them¬ 
selves. This, however, I know—that if every 
nation were to bring all its evil deeds to a 
given place, in order to make an exchange 
with some other nation, when they had all 
looked carefully at their neighbours’ faults, 
they would be truly glad to carry their own 
back again. So, after all, the conduct of the 
Argives was not perhaps more disgraceful than 
that of others. For myself, my duty is to re¬ 
port all that is said; but I am not obliged to 
believe it all alike—a remark which may be 
understood to apply to my whole History. 
Some even go so far as to say that the Argives 
first invited the Persians to invade Greece, 
because of their ill success in the war with 
Lacedaemon, since they preferred anything to 
the smart of their actual sufferings. Thus 
much concerning the Argives. 

153. Other ambassadors, among whom was 
Syagrus from Lacedaemon, were sent by the 
allies into Sicily, with instructions to confer 
with Gelo. 

The ancestor of this Gelo, who first settled 
at Gela, was a native of the isle of Telos, which 
lies off Triopium. When Gela was colonised 
by Antiphemus and the Lindians of Rhodes, 
he likewise took part in the expedition. In 
course of time his descendants became the 
high-priests of the gods who dwell below—an 
office which they held continually, from the 
time that Telines, one of Gelo’s ancestors, ob¬ 
tained it in the way which I will now men¬ 
tion. Certain citizens of Gela, worsted in a se¬ 
dition, had found a refuge at Mactorium, a 
town situated on the heights above Gela. Te¬ 
lines reinstated these men, without any hu¬ 
man help, solely by means of the sacred rites 








150 - 157 I the history 243 


of these deities. Frcm whom he received them, 
or how he himself acquired them, I cannot 
say; but certain it is that relying on their pow¬ 
er he brought the exiles back. For this his re¬ 
ward was to be the office of high-priest of 
those gods for himself and his seed for ever. 
It surprises me especially that such a feat 
should have been performed by Telines; for 
I have always looked upon acts of this nature 
as beyond the abilities of common men, and 
only to be achieved by such as are of a bold 
and manly spirit; whereas Telines is said by 
those who dwell about Sicily to have been a 
soft-hearted and womanish person. He how¬ 
ever obtained this office in the manner above 
described. 

154. Afterwards, on the death of Oleander 
the son of Pantares, who was slain by Sabyllus, 
a citizen of Gela, after he had held the tyranny 
for seven years, Hippocrates, Oleander’s broth¬ 
er, mounted the throne. During his reign, 
Gelo, a descendant of the high-priest Telines, 
served with many others—of whom /Eneside- 
mus, son of Pataicus, was one—in the king’s 
bodyguard. Within a little time his merit 
caused him to be raised to the command ot all 
the horse. For when Hippocrates laid siege to 
Oallipolis, and afterwards to Naxos, to Zancle, 
to Leontini, and moreover to Syracuse, and 
many cities of the barbarians, Gelo in every war 
distinguished himself above all the combatants. 
Of the various cities above named, there was 
none but Syracuse which was not reduced to 
slavery. The Syracusans were saved from this 
fate, after they had suffered defeat on the river 
Elbrus, by the Corinthians and Corcyra;ans, 
who made peace between them and Hippo¬ 
crates, on condition of their ceding Camarina 
to him; for that city anciently belonged to Syr¬ 
acuse. 

155. When, however, Hippocrates, after a 
reign of the same length as that of Oleander 
his brother, perished near the city Hybla, as 
he was warring with the native Sicilians, then 
Gelo, pretending to espouse the cause of the 
two sons of Hippocrates, Eucleides and Olean¬ 
der, defeated the citizens who were seeking to 
recover their freedom, and having so done, set 
aside the children, and himself took the king¬ 
ly power. After this piece of good fortune, 
Gelo likewise became master of Syracuse, in 
the following manner. The Syracusan land¬ 
holders, as they were called, had been driven 
from their city by the common people assisted 
by their own slaves, the Cyllyrians, and had 
fled to Casmenae. Gelo brought them back to 


Syracuse, and so got possession of the town; 
for the people surrendered themselves, and 
gave up their city on his approach. 

156. Being now master of Syracuse, Gelo 
cared less to govern Gela, which he therefore 
entrusted to his brother Hiero, while he 
strengthened the defences of his new city, 
which indeed was now all in all to him. And 
Syracuse sprang up rapidly to power and be¬ 
came a flourishing place. For Gelo razed Cam¬ 
arina to the ground, and brought all the in¬ 
habitants to Syracuse, and made them citizens; 
he also brought thither more than half the 
citizens of Gela, and gave them the same 
rights as the Camarinaans. So likewise with 
the Megarians of Sicily—after besieging their 
town and forcing them to surrender, he took 
the rich men, who, having made the war, 
looked now for nothing less than death at his 
hands, and carrying them to Syracuse, estab¬ 
lished them there as citizens; while the com¬ 
mon people, who, as they had not taken any 
share in the struggle, felt secure that no harm 
would be done to them, he carried likewise to 
Syracuse, where he sold them all as slaves to be 
conveyed abroad. He did the like also by the 
Eubceans of Sicily, making the same differ¬ 
ence. His conduct towards both nations arose 
from his belief that a “people” was a most un¬ 
pleasant companion. In this way Gelo became 
a great king. 

157. When the Greek envoys reached Syra¬ 
cuse, and were admitted to an audience, they 
spoke as follows— 

“We have been sent hither by the Lacedae¬ 
monians and Athenians, with their respective 
allies, to ask thee to join us against the barbar¬ 
ian. Doubtless thou hast heard of his invasion, 
and art aware that a Persian is about to throw 
a bridge over the Hellespont, and, bringing 
with him out of Asia all the forces of the East, 
to carry war into Greece—professing indeed 
that he only seeks to attack Athens, but really 
bent on bringing all the Greeks into subjection. 
Do thou therefore, we beseech thee, aid those 
who would maintain the freedom of Greece, 
and thyself assist to free her; since the power 
which thou wieldest is great, and thy portion 
in Greece, as lord of Sicily, is no small one. For 
if all Greece join together in one, there will be 
a mighty host collected, and we shall be a 
match for our assailants; but if some turn trai¬ 
tors, and others refuse their aid, and only a 
small part of the whole body remains sound, 
then there is reason to fear that all Greece may 
perish. For do not thou cherish a hope that 


244 

the Persian, when he has conquered our coun¬ 
try, will be content and not advance against 
thee. Rather take thy measures beforehand, 
and consider that thou defendest thyself when 
thou givest aid to us. Wise counsels, be sure, 
for the most part have prosperous issues.” 

158. Thus spake the envoys; and Gelo re¬ 
plied with vehemence:— 

“Greeks, ye have had the face to come here 
with selfish words, and exhort me to join in 
league with you against the barbarian. Yet 
when I erewhile asked you to join with me in 
fighting barbarians, what time the quarrel 
broke out between me and Carthage; and 
when I earnestly besought you to revenge on 
the men of Egesta their murder of Dorieus, the 
son of Anaxandridas, promising to assist you 
in setting free the trading places from which 
you receive great profits and advantages, you 
neither came hither to give me succour, nor 
yet to revenge Dorieus; but, for any efforts on 
your part to hinder it, these countries might at 
this time have been entirely under the barbar¬ 
ians. Now, however, that matters have pros¬ 
pered and gone well with me, while the dan¬ 
ger has shifted its ground and at present threat¬ 
ens yourselves, lo! you call Gelo to mind. But 
though ye slighted me then, I will not imitate 
you now: I am ready to give you aid, and to 
furnish as my contribution two hundred tri¬ 
remes, twenty thousand men-at-arms, two 
thousand cavalry, and an equal number of 
archers, slingers, and light horsemen, together 
with corn for the whole Grecian army so long 
as the war shall last. These services, however, I 
promise on one condition—that ye appoint me 
chief captain and commander of the Grecian 
forces during the war with the barbarian. Un¬ 
less ye agree to this, I will neither send suc¬ 
cours, nor come myself.” 

159. Syagrus, when he heard these words, 
was unable to contain himself, and ex¬ 
claimed:— 

“Surely a groan would burst from Pelops’ 
son, Agamemnon, did he hear that her leader¬ 
ship was snatched from Sparta by Gelo and 
the men of Syracuse. Speak then no more of 
any such condition, as that we should yield 
thee the chief command; but if thou art mind¬ 
ed to come to the aid of Greece, prepare to 
serve under Lacedaemonian generals. Wilt thou 
not serve under a leader.^—then, prithee, with¬ 
hold thy succours.” 

160. Hereupon Gelo, seeing the indignation 
which showed itself in the wolds of Syagrus, 
delivered to the envoys his final offer:—“Spar- 


\ Book vii 

tan stranger,” he said, “reproaches cast forth 
against a man are wont to provoke him to 
anger; but the insults which thou hast uttered 
in thy speech shall not persuade me to outstep 
good breeding in my answer. Surely if you 
maintain so stoutly your right to the com¬ 
mand, it is reasonable that I should be still 
more stiff in maintaining mine, forasmuch as 
I am at the head of a far larger fleet and army. 
Since, however, the claim which I have put 
forward is so displeasing to you, I will yield, 
and be content with less. Take, if it please you, 
the command of the land-force, and I will be 
admiral of the fleet; or assume, if you prefer 
it, the command by sea, and I will be leader 
upon the land. Unless you are satisfied with 
these terms, you must return home by your¬ 
selves, and lose this great alliance.” Such was 
the offer which Gelo made. 

161. Hereat broke in the Athenian envoy, 
before the Spartan could answer, and thus ad¬ 
dressed Gelo— 

“King of the Syracusans! Greece sent us 
here to thee to ask for an army, and not to ask 
for a general. Thou, however, dost not prom¬ 
ise to send us any army at all, if thou art not 
made leader of the Greeks; and this command 
is what alone thou stickiest for. Now when 
thy request was to have the whole command, 
we were content to keep silence; for well we 
knew that we might trust the Spartan envoy to 
make answer for us both. But since, after fail¬ 
ing in thy claim to lead the whole armament, 
thou hast now put forward a request to have 
the command of the fleet, know that, even 
should the Spartan envoy consent to this, we 
will not consent. The command by sea, if the 
Lacedaemonians do not wish for it, belongs to 
us. While they like to keep this command, we 
shall raise no dispute; but we will not yield 
our right to it in favour of any one else. Where 
would be the advantage of our having raised 
up a naval force greater than that of any other 
Greek people, if nevertheless we should suffer 
Syracusans to take the command away from 
us?—from us, I say, who are Athenians, the 
most ancient nation in Greece, the only Greeks 
who have never changed their abode—the peo¬ 
ple who are said by the poet Homer to have 
sent to Troy the man best able of all the Greeks 
to array and marshal an army—so that we may 
be allowed to boast somewhat.” 

162. Gelo replied—“Athenian stranger, ye 
have, it seems, no lack of commanders; but ye 
are likely to lack men to receive their orders. 
As ye are resolved to yield nothing and claim 


HERODOTUS 







i::S-i68l IHE HISTORY 245 


everything, ye had best make haste back to 
(Teece, and say that the spring of her year 
is lost to her.” The meaning of this expression 
was the following: as the spring is manifestly 
the finest season of the year, so (he meant to 
say) were his troops the finest of the Greek 
army—Greece, therefore, deprived of his alli¬ 
ance, would be like a year with the spring tak¬ 
en from it. 

163. Then the Greek envoys, without hav¬ 
ing any further dealings with Gelo, sailed 
away home. And Gelo, who feared that the 
Greeks would be too weak to withstand the 
barbarians, and yet could not any how bring 
himself to go to the Peloponnese, and there, 
though king of Sicily, serve under the Laceda::- 
monians, left of 4 altogether to contemplate that 
course of action, and betook himself to quite 
a difTerent plan. As soon as ever tidings 
reached him of the passage of the Hellespont 
by the Persians, he sent off three penteconters, 
under the command of Cadmus, the son of 
Scythas, a native of Cos, who was to go to Del¬ 
phi, taking with him a large sum of money 
and a stock of friendly words: there he was to 
watch the war, and see what turn it would 
take: if the barbarians prevailed, he was to 
give Xerxes the treasure, and with it earth and 
water for the lands which Gelo ruled—if the 
Greeks won the day, he was to convey the 
treasure back. 

164. This Cadmus had at an earlier time re¬ 
ceived from his father the kingly power at Cos 
in a right good condition, and had of his own 
free will and without the approach of any dan¬ 
ger, from pure love of justice, given up his 
power into the hands of the people at large, 
and departed to Sicily; where he assisted in 
the Samian seizure and settlement of Zancle, 
or Messana, as it was afterwards called. Upon 
this occasion Gelo chose him to send into 
Greece, because he was acquainted with the 
proofs of honesty which he had given. And 
now he added to his former honourable deeds 
an action which is not the least of his merits. 
With a vast sum entrusted to him and com¬ 
pletely in his power, so that he might have 
kept it for his own use if he had liked, he did 
not touch it; but when the Greeks gained the 
sea-fight and Xerxes fled away with his army, 
he brought the whole treasure back with him 
to Sicily. 

165. They, however, who dwell in Sicily, 
say that Gelo, though he knew that he must 
serve under the Lacedemonians, would never¬ 
theless have come to the aid of the Greeks, had 


not it been for Terillus, the son of Crinippus, 
king of Himera; who, driven trom his city by 
Thero, the son of /Knesidemus, king of Agri- 
gentum, brought into Sicily at this very time 
an army of three hundred thousand men, Phoe¬ 
nicians, Libyans, Iberians, Ligurians, Helisy- 
cians, Sardinians, and Corsicans, under the 
command of I la mi lea r the son of Han no, king 
of the Carthaginians. Terillus prevailed upon 
Hamilcar, partly as his sworn friend, but more 
through the zealous aid of Anaxilai’is the son 
of Cretines, king of Rhegium; who, by giving 
his own sons to Hamilcar as hostages, induced 
him to make the expedition. Anaxilaus herein 
served his own father-in-law; for he was mar¬ 
ried to a daughter of Terillus, by name Cydip- 
pe. So, as Cielo could not give the Greeks any 
aid, he sent (they say) the sum of money to 
Delphi. 

166. They say too, that the victory of Gelo 
and Thero in Sicily over Hamilcar the Car¬ 
thaginian fell out upon the very day that the 
Greeks defeated the Persians at Salamis. Ham¬ 
ilcar, who was a Carthaginian on his father’s 
side only, but on his mother’s a Syracusan, and 
who had been raised by his merit to the throne 
of Carthage, after the battle and the defeat, as 
I am informed, disappeared from sight: Gelo 
made the strictest search for him, but he could 
not be found anywhere, either dead or alive. 

167. The Carthaginians, who take proba¬ 
bility for their guide, give the following ac¬ 
count of this matter:—Hamilcar, they say, 
during all the time that the battle raged be¬ 
tween the Greeks and the barbarians, which 
was from early dawn till evening, remained in 
the camp, sacrificing and seeking favourable 
omens, while he burned on a huge pyre the 
entire bodies of the victims which he ofTered. 
Here, as he poured libations upon the sacri¬ 
fices, he saw the rout of his army; whereupon 
he cast himself headlong into the flames, and 
so was consumed and disappeared. But wheth¬ 
er Hamilcar’s disappearance happened, as the 
Phoenicians tell us, in this way, or, as the Syra¬ 
cusans maintain, in some other, certain it is 
that the Carthaginians offer him sacrifice, and 
in all their colonies have monuments erected 
to his honour, as well as one, which is the 
grandest of all, at Carthage. Thus much con¬ 
cerning the affairs of Sicily. 

168. As for the Coreyraeans, whom the en¬ 
voys that visited Sicily took in their way, and 
to whom they delivered the same message as 
to Gelo—their answers and actions were the 
following. With great readiness they promised 


246 

to come and give their help to the Greeks; de¬ 
claring that “the ruin of Greece was a thing 
which they could not tamely stand by to see; 
for should she fall, they must the very next day 
submit to slavery; so that they were bound to 
assist her to the very uttermost of their power.” 
But notwithstanding that they answered so 
smoothly, yet when the time came for the suc¬ 
cours to be sent, they were of quite a different 
mind; and though they manned sixty ships, 
it was long ere they put to sea with them; and 
when they had so done, they went no further 
than the Peloponnese, where they lay to with 
their fleet, off the Lacedaemonian coast, about 
Pylos and Taenarum—like Gelo, watching to 
see what turn the war would take. For they 
despaired altogether of the Greeks gaining the 
day, and expected that the Persian would win 
a great battle, and then be master of the whole 
of Greece. They therefore acted as I have said, 
in order that they might be able to address 
Xerxes in words like these: “O king! though 
the Greeks sought to obtain our aid in their 
war with thee, and though we had a force of 
no small size, and could have furnished a 
greater number of ships than any Greek state 
except Athens, yet we refused, since we would 
not fight against thee, nor do aught to cause 
thee annoyance.” The Corcyrseans hoped that 
a speech like this would gain them better treat¬ 
ment from the Persians than the rest of the 
Greeks; and it would have done so, in my 
judgment. At the same time, they had an ex¬ 
cuse ready to give their countrymen, which 
they used when the time came. Reproached by 
them for sending no succours, they replied 
“that they had fitted out a fleet of sixty tri¬ 
remes, but that the Etesian winds did not al¬ 
low them to double Cape Malea, and this hin¬ 
dered them from reaching Salamis—it was not 
from any bad motive that they had missed the 
sea-fight.” In this way the Corcyraans eluded 
the reproaches of the Greeks. 

169. The Cretans, when the envoys sent to 
ask aid from them came and made their re¬ 
quest, acted as follows. They despatched mes¬ 
sengers in the name of their state to Delphi, 
and asked the god, whether it would make for 
their welfare if they should lend succour to 
Greece. “Fools!” replied the Pythoness, “do 
ye not still complain of the woes which the 
assisting of Menelaiis cost you at the hands of 
angry Minos How wroth was he, when, in 
spite of their having lent you no aid towards 
avenging his death at Camicus, you helped 
them to avenge the carrying off by a barbarian 


[ Book vii 

of a woman from Sparta!” When this answer 
was brought from Delphi to the Cretans, they 
thought no more of assisting the Greeks. 

170. Minos, according to tradition, went to 
Sicania, or Sicily, as it is now called, in search 
of Daedalus, and there perished by a violent 
death. After a while the Cretans, warned by 
some god or other, made a great expedition 
into Sicania, all except the Polichnites and the • 
Praesians, and besieged Camicus (which in my 
time belonged to Agrigentum) by the space of 
five years. At last, however, failing in their 
efforts to take the place, and unable to carry , 
on the siege any longer from the pressure of , 
hunger, they departed and went their way. 
Voyaging homewards they had reached lapy- 
gia, when a furious storm arose and threw 
them upon the coast. All their vessels were 1 
broken in pieces; and so, as they saw no means 
of returning to Crete, they founded the town 
of Hyria, where they took up their abode, 
changing their name from Cretans to Messa- 
pian lapygians, and at the same time becoming 1 
inhabitants of the mainland instead of island- I 
ers. From Hyria they afterwards founded 1 
those other towns which the Tarentines at a 11 
much later period endeavoured to take, but |i 
could not, being defeated signally. Indeed so 
dreadful a slaughter of Greeks never hap¬ 
pened at any other time, so far as my knowl¬ 
edge extends: nor was it only the Tarentines 
who suffered; but the men of Rhegium too, 
who had been forced to go to the aid of the 
Tarentines by Micythus the son of Choerus, ' 
lost here three thousand of their citizens; while 1 
the number of the Tarentines who fell was be¬ 
yond all count. This Micythus had been a 
household slave of Anaxilaiis, and was by him ! 
left in charge of Rhegium: he is the same man | 
who was afterwards forced to leave Rhegium, I 
when he settled at Tegea in Arcadia, from ' 
which place he made his many offerings of I 
statues to the shrine at Olympia. 

171. This account of the Rhegians and the 
Tarentines is a digression from the story 
which I was relating. To return—the Praesians 
say that m.en of various nations now flocked to ' 
Crete, which was stript of its inhabitants; but 
none came in such numbers as the Grecians. 
Three generations after the death of Minos the 
Trojan war took place; and the Cretans were 
not the least distinguished among the helpers 
of Menelaiis. But on this account, when they 
came back from Troy, famine and pestilence 
fell upon them, and destroyed both the men I' 
and the cattle. Crete was a second time stript ' 


HERODOTUS 




169 - 176 ) THE HI 

of its inhabitants, a remnant only bcini; lett; 
who form, together with fresh settlers, the 
third “Cretan” people by whom the island has 
been inhabited. These were the events of 
which the Pythoness now reminded the men 
of Crete; and thereby she prevented them from 
giving the Greeks aid, though they wished to 
have gone to their assistance. 

172. The Thessalians did not embrace the 
cause of the Medes until they were forced to 
do so; for they gave plain proof that the in¬ 
trigues of the Aleuad.e were not at all to their 
liking. No sooner did they hear that the Per¬ 
sian was about to cross over into Europe than 
they despatched envoys to the (ireeks who 
were met to consult together at the Isthmus, 
whither all the states which were well inclined 
to the Grecian cause had sent their delegates. 
These envoys on their arrival thus addressed 
their countrymen:— 

‘‘Men of Greece, it behoves you to guard the 
pass of Olympus; for thus will Thessaly be 
placed in safety, as well as the rest of Greece. 
We for our parts are quite ready to take our 
share in this work; but you must likewise send 
us a strong force: otherwise we give you fair 
warning that we shall make terms with the 
Persians. For we ought not to be left, exposed 
as we are in front ot all the rest of Cireecc, to 
die in your defence alone and unassisted. If 
however you do not choose to send us aid, you 
cannot force us to resist the enemy; for there 
is no force so strong as inability. We shall 
therefore do our best to secure our own safety.” 

Such was the declaration of the Thessalians. 

173. Hereupon the Greeks determined to 
send a body of foot to Thessaly by sea, which 
should defend the pass of Olympus. Accord¬ 
ingly a force was collected, which passed up the 
Euripus, and disembarking at Alus, on the 
coast of Achaea, left the ships there, and 
marched by land into Thessaly. Here they oc¬ 
cupied the defile of Tempe; which leads from 
Lower Macedonia into Thessaly along the 
course of the Peneus, having the range of 
Olympus on the one hand and Ossa upon the 
other. In this place the Greek force that had 
been collected, amounting to about 10,000 
heavy-armed men, pitched their camp; and 
here they were joined by the Thessalian caval¬ 
ry. The commanders were, on the part of the 
Lacedaemonians, Evsenetus, the son of Care- 
nus, who had been chosen out of the Pole- 
marchs, but did not belong to the blood royal; 
and on the part of the Athenians, Themis- 
tocles, the son of Neocles. They did not how- 


STORY 247 

ever maintain their station for more than a few 
days; since envoys came from Alexander, the 
son of Amyntas, the Macedonian, and coun¬ 
selled them to decamp from Tempe, telling 
them that if they remained in the pass they 
would be trodden under foot by the invading 
army, whose numbers they recounted, and 
likewise the multitude of their ships. So when 
the envoys thus counselled them, and the coun¬ 
sel seemed to be good, and the Macedonian 
who sent it iriendly, they did even as he ad¬ 
vised. In my opinion what chiefly wrought on 
them was the fear that the Persians might en¬ 
ter by another pass, whereof they now heard, 
which led from Upper Macedonia into Thessa¬ 
ly through the territory ot the Perrhxbi, and 
by the town of Gonnus—the pass by which 
soon afterwards the army of Xerxes actually 
made its entrance. The Greeks therefore went 
back to their ships and sailed away to the 
Isthmus. 

174. Such were the circumstances of the ex¬ 
pedition into Thessaly; they took place when 
the king was at Abydos, preparing to pass from 
Asia into Europe. The Thessalians, when their 
allies forsook them, no longer wavered, but 
warmly espoused the side of the Medes; and 
afterwards, in the course ot the war, they were 
of the very greatest service to Xerxes. 

175. The (Greeks, on their return to the Isth¬ 
mus, took counsel together concerning the 
words of Alexander, and considered where 
they should fix the war, and what places they 
should occupy. The opinion which prevailed 
was that they should guard the pass of Ther- 
mopyla*; since it was narrower than the Thes¬ 
salian defile, and at the same time nearer to 
them. Of the pathway, by which the Greeks 
who fell at Thermopylae were intercepted, they 
had no knowledge, until, on their arrival at 
Thermopylae, it was discovered to them by the 
Trachinians. This pass then it was determined 
that they should guard, in order to prevent the 
barbarians from penetrating into Greece 
through it; and at the same time it was resolved 
that the fleet should proceed to Artemisium, in 
the region of Histiaeotis, for, as those places are 
near to one another, it would be easy for the 
fleet-and army to hold communication. The 
two places may be thus described. 

176. Artemisium is where the sea of Thrace 
contracts into a narrow channel, running be¬ 
tween the isle of Sciathus and the mainland 
of Magnesia. When this narrow strait is passed 
you come to the line of coast called Artemisi¬ 
um; which is a portion of Euboea, and contains 


248 

a temple of Artemis (Diana). As for the en¬ 
trance into Greece by Trachis, it is, at its nar¬ 
rowest point, about fifty feet wide. This how¬ 
ever is not the place where the passage is most 
contracted; for it is still narrower a little above 
and a little below Thermopylae. At Alpeni, 
which is lower down than that place, it is only 
wide enough for a single carriage; and up 
above, at the river Phoenix, near the town 
called Anthela, it is the same. West of Ther- 
mopyhc rises a lofty and precipitous hill, impos¬ 
sible to climb, which runs up into the chain of 
QEta; while to the east the road is shut in by 
the sea and by marshes. In this place are the 
warm springs, which the natives call “The 
Cauldrons”; and above them stands an altar 
sacred to Hercules. A wall had once been car¬ 
ried across the opening; and in this there had 
of old times been a gateway. These works were 
made by the Phocians, through fear of the 
Thessalians, at the time when the latter came 
from Thesprotia to establish themselves in the 
land of iTolis, which they still occupy. As the 
Thessalians strove to reduce Phocis, the Pho¬ 
cians raised the wall to protect themselves, and 
likewise turned the hot springs upon the pass, 
that so the ground might be broken up by 
watercourses, using thus all possible means to 
hinder the Thessalians from invading their 
country. The old wall had been built in very 
remote times; and the greater part of it had 
gone to decay through age. Now however the 
Greeks resolved to repair its breaches, and here 
make their stand against the barbarian. At this 
point there is a village very nigh the road, Al¬ 
peni by name, from which the Greeks reck¬ 
oned on getting corn for their troops. 

177. These places, therefore, seemed to the 
Greeks fit for their purpose. Weighing well all 
that was likely to happen, and considering that 
in this region the barbarians could make no 
use of their vast numbers, nor of their cavalry, 
they resolved to await here the invader of 
Greece. And when news reached them of the 
Persians being in Pieria, straightway they 
broke up from the Isthmus, and proceeded, 
some on foot to Thermopylae, others by sea to 
Artemisium. 

178. The Greeks now made all speed to 
reach the two stations; and about the same 
time the Delphians, alarmed both for them¬ 
selves and for their country, consulted the god, 
and received for answer a command to “pray 
to the winds, for the winds would do Greece 
good service.” So when this answer was given 
them, forthwith the Delphians sent word of 


[ Book vii 

the prophecy to those Greeks who were zeal¬ 
ous for freedom, and, cheering them thereby , 
amid the fears which they entertained with re¬ 
spect to the barbarian, earned their everlasting 
gratitude. This done, they raised an altar to 
the winds at Thyia (where Thyia, the daugh¬ 
ter of Cephissus, from whom the region takes 
its name, has a precinct), and worshipped 
them with sacrifices. And even to the present 
day the Delphians sacrifice to the winds, be- | 
cause of this oracle. 

179. The fleet of Xerxes now departed from 
Therma; and ten of the swiftest sailing ships 
ventured to stretch across direct for Sciathus, 1 
at which place there were upon the look-out | 
three vessels belonging to the Greeks, one a 1 
ship of Troezen, another of Egina, and the 1 
third from Athens. These vessels no sooner ( 
saw from a distance the barbarians approach- I 
ing than they all hurriedly took to flight. 

180. The barbarians at once pursued, and 
the Troezenian ship, which was commanded 
by Prexinus, fell into their hands. Hereupon 
the Persians took the handsomest of the men- 
at-arms, and drew him to the prow of the ves¬ 
sel, where they sacrificed him; for they thought 
the man a good omen to their cause, seeing 
that he was at once so beautiful, and likewise 
the first captive they had made. The man who 
was slain in this way was called Leo; and it 
may be that the name he bore helped him to 
his fate in some measure. 

181. The Eginetan trireme, under its cap¬ 
tain, Asonides, gave the Persians no little 
trouble, one of the men-at-arms, Pythes, the I 
son of Ischenoiis, distinguishing himself be¬ 
yond all the others who fought on that day. 
After the ship was taken this man continued r 
to resist, and did not cease fighting till he fell i; 
quite covered with wounds. The Persians who 
served as men-at-arms in the squadron, find- - 
ing that he was not dead, but still breathed, f 
and being very anxious to save his life, since ■ 
he had behaved so valiantly, dressed his ■ 
wounds with myrrh, and bound them up with 
bandages of cotton. Then, when they were re¬ 
turned to their own station, they displayed ‘ 
their prisoner admiringly to the whole host, 
and behaved towards him with much kind¬ 
ness; but all the rest of the ship’s crew were • 
treated merely as slaves. 

182. Thus did the Persians succeed in tak- ^ 
ing two of the vessels. The third, a trireme j' 
commanded by Phormus of Athens, took to ' 
flight and ran aground at the mouth of the 
river Peneus. The barbarians got possession of ' 


HERODOTUS 






177 - 187 ] THE HISTORY 2-49 


the bark, but not of the men. For the Atheni¬ 
ans had no sooner run their vessel aground 
than they leapt out, and made their way 
through Thessaly back to Athens. 

When the Greeks stationed at Artemisium 
learnt what had happened by fire-signals from 
Sciathus, so terrified were they, that, quitting 
their anchorage-ground at Artemisium, and 
leaving scouts to watch the foe on the high¬ 
lands of Eubcea, they removed to Chalcis, in¬ 
tending to guard the Euripus. 

183. Meantime three of the ten vessels sent 
forward by the barbarians advanced as far as 
the sunken rock between Sciathus and Mag¬ 
nesia, which is called “The Ant,” and there set 
up a stone pillar which they had brought with 
them for that purpose. After this, their course 
being now clear, the barbarians set sail with all 
their ships from Therma, eleven days from the 
time that the king quitted the town. The rock, 
which lay directly in their course, had been 
made known to them by Pammon of Scyros. A 
day’s voyage without a stop brought them to 
Sepias in Magnesia, and to the strip of coast 
which lies between the town of Casthanxa and 
the promontory of Sepias. 

184. As far as this point then, and on land, 
as far as Thermopylae, the armament of Xerxes 
had been free from mischance; and the num¬ 
bers were still, according to my reckoning, of 
the following amount. First there was the an¬ 
cient complement of the twelve hundred and 
seven vessels which came with the king from 
Asia—the contingents of the nations severally 
—amounting, if we allow to each ship a crew 
of two hundred men, to 241,400. Each of these 
vessels had on board, besides native soldiers, 
thirty fighting men, who were either Persians, 
Medes, or Sacans; which gives an addition of 
36,210. To these two numbers I shall further 
add the crews of the penteconters; which may 
be reckoned, one with another, at fourscore 
men each. Of such vessels there were (as I 
said before) three thousand; and the men on 
board them accordingly would be 240,000. 
This was the sea force brought by the king 
from Asia; and it amounted in all to 517,610 
men. The number of the foot soldiers was 
1,700,000; that of the horsemen 80,000; to 
which must be added the Arabs who rode on 
camels, and the Libyans who fought in chari¬ 
ots, whom I reckon at 20,000. The whole num¬ 
ber, therefore, of the land and sea forces added 
together amounts to 2,317,610 men. Such was 
the force brought from Asia, without includ¬ 
ing the camp followers, or taking any account 


of the provision-ships and the men whom they 
had on board. 

185. To the amount thus reached we have 
still to add the forces gathered in Eurojx^, con¬ 
cerning which I can only speak from conjec¬ 
ture. The Greeks dwelling in Thrace, and in 
the islands ofif the coast of Thrace, furnished 
to the fleet one hundred and twenty ships; the 
crews of which would amount to 24,000 men. 
Besides these, footmen were furnished by the 
Thracians, the Pa:onians, the Eordians, the 
Bottixans, by the Chalcidean tribes, by the 
Brygians, the Pierians, the Macedonians, the 
Perrhcxbians, the Enianians, the Dolopians, the 
Magnesians, the AchcTans, and by all the dwell¬ 
ers upon the Thracian sea-board; and the for¬ 
ces of these nations amounted, I believe, to 
three hundred thousand men. These numbers, 
added to those of the force which came out 
of Asia, make the sum of the fighting men 
2,641,610. 

186. Such then being the number of the 
fighting men, it is my belief that the attendants 
who followed the camp, together with the 
crews of the corn-barks, and of the other craft 
accompanying the army, made up an amount 
rather above than below that of the fighting 
men. However I will not reckon them as either 
fewer or more, but take them at an equal 
number. We have therefore to add to the sum 
already reached an exactly equal amount. This 
will give 5,283,220 as the whole number of 
men brought by Xerxes, the son of Darius, as 
far as Sepias and Thermopylae. 

187. Such then was the amount of the en¬ 
tire host of Xerxes. As for the number of the 
women who ground the corn, of the concu¬ 
bines, and the eunuchs, no one can give any 
sure account of it; nor can the baggage-horses 
and other sumpter-beasts, nor the Indian 
hounds which followed the army, be calcu¬ 
lated, by reason of their multitude. Hence I am 
not at all surprised that the water of the rivers 
was found too scant for the army in some in¬ 
stances; rather it is a marvel to me how the 
provisions did not fail, when the numbers 
were so great. For I find on calculation that if 
each man consumed no more than a choenix 
of corn a day, there must have been used daily 
by the army 110,340 medimni, and this with¬ 
out counting what was eaten by the women, 
the eunuchs, the sumpter-beasts, and the 
hounds. Among all this multitude of men there 
was not one who, for beauty and stature, de¬ 
served more than Xerxes himself to wield so 
vast a power. 


250 HERODOTUS [Book vii 


188. The fleet then, as I said, on leaving 
Therma, sailed to the Magnesian territory, and 
there occupied the strip of coast between the 
city of Casthanaea and Cape Sepias. The ships 
of the first row were moored to the land, while 
the remainder swung at anchor further ofi. 
The beach extended but a very little way, so 
that they had to anchor ofi the shore, row upon 
row, eight deep. In this manner they passed 
the night. But at dawn of day calm and still¬ 
ness gave place to a raging sea, and a violent 
storm, which fell upon them with a strong 
gale from the east—a wind which the people 
in those parts call Hellespontias. Such of them 
as perceived the wind rising, and were so 
moored as to allow of it, forestalled the temp¬ 
est by dragging their ships up on the beach, 
and in this way saved both themselves and 
their vessels. But the ships which the storm 
caught out at sea were driven ashore, some of 
them near the place called Ipni, or “The Ov¬ 
ens,’’ at the foot of Pelion; others on the strand 
itself; others again about Cape Sepias; while 
a portion were dashed to pieces near the cities 
of Melibcea and Casthana^a. There was no re¬ 
sisting the tempest. 

189. It is said that the Athenians had called 
upon Boreas to aid the Greeks, on account of 
a fresh oracle which had reached them, com¬ 
manding them to “seek help from their son- 
in-law.’’ For Boreas, according to the tradition 
of the Greeks, took to wife a woman of Attica, 
viz., Orithyia, the daughter of Erechtheus. So 
the Athenians, as the tale goes, considering 
that this marriage made Boreas their son-in- 
law, and perceiving, while they lay with their 
ships at Chalcis of Eubcea, that the wind was 
rising, or, it may be, even before it freshened, 
offered sacrifice both to Boreas and likewise to 
Orithyia, entreating them to come to their aid 
and to destroy the ships of the barbarians, as 
they did once before ofi Mount Athos. Wheth¬ 
er it was owing to this that Boreas fell with 
violence on the barbarians at their anchorage 
I cannot say; but the Athenians declare that 
they had received aid from Boreas before, and 
that it was he who now caused all these disas¬ 
ters. They therefore, on their return home, 
built a temple to this god on the banks of the 
Ilissus. 

190. Such as put the loss of the Persian fleet 
in this storm at the lowest say that four hun¬ 
dred of their ships were destroyed, that a 
countless multitude of men were slain, and a 
vast treasure engulfed. Ameinocles, the son of 
Cretines, a Magnesian, who farmed land near 


Cape Sepias, found the wreck of these vessels 
a source of great gain to him; many were the 
gold and silver drinking-cups, cast up long 
afterwards by the surf, which he gathered; 
while treasure-boxes too which had belonged 
to the Persians, and golden articles of all kinds 
and beyond count, came into his possession. 
Ameinocles grew to be a man of great wealth 
in this way; but in other respects things did 
not go over well with him: he too, like other 
men, had his own grief—the calamity of losing 
his offspring. 

191. As for the number of the provision 
craft and other merchant ships which perished. A 
it was beyond count. Indeed, such was the 
loss, that the commanders of the sea force, fear¬ 
ing lest in their shattered condition the Thes¬ 
salians should venture on an attack, raised a 
lofty barricade around their station out of the 
wreck of the vessels cast ashore. The storm 
lasted three days. At length the Magians, by 
offering victims to the Winds, and charming 
them with the help of conjurers, while at the 
same time they sacrificed to Thetis and the 
Nereids, succeeded in laying the storm four 
days after it first began; or perhaps it ceased of 
itself. The reason of their offering sacrifice to 
Thetis was this: they were told by the lonians 
that here was the place whence Peleus carried 
her off, and that the whole promontory was h 
sacred to her and to her sister Nereids. So the 
storm lulled upon the fourth day. 

192. The scouts left by the Greeks about the 
highlands of Eubcea hastened down from their 
stations on the day following that whereon the 
storm began, and acquainted their countrymen 
with all that had befallen the Persian fleet. 
These no sooner heard what had happened 
than straightway they returned thanks to Nep¬ 
tune the Saviour, and poured libations in his 
honour; after which they hastened back with 
all speed to Artemisium, expecting to find a 
very few ships left to oppose them, and arriv¬ 
ing there for the second time, took up their 
station on that strip of coast: nor from that day 
to the present have they ceased to address Nep¬ 
tune by the name then given him, of “Sav- 
* _ 

lOur. 

193. The barbarians, when the wind lulled 
and the sea grew smooth, drew their ships 
down to the water, and proceeded to coast 
along the mainland. Having then rounded the 
extreme point of Magnesia, they sailed straight 
into the bay that runs up to Pagasae. There is a 
place in this bay, belonging to Magnesia, 
where Hercules is said to have been put ashore 






1 SS- 19 S 1 THE HISTORY 251 


to tcich water by Jason and his companions; 
who then deserted him and went on their way 
to /Ha in Colchis, on hoard the ship Argo, in 
quest ot the golden fleece. From the circum¬ 
stance that they intended, after watering their 
vessel at this place, to quit the shore and 
launch forth into the deep, it received the 
name of Apheta:. Here then it was that the 
I fleet of Xerxes came to an anchor. 

I 194. Fifteen ships, which had lagged great- 

I ly behind the rest, happening to catch sight of 
the Greek fleet at .Vrtemisium, mistook it for 
their own, and sailing down into the midst of 
it, fell into the hands of the enemy. The com¬ 
mander of this squadron was Sandoces, the 
son of Thamasius, governor of Cyme, in /Eo- 
lis. He was of the number of the royal judges, 

I and had been crucified by Darius some time 
before, on the charge of taking a hril^e to de¬ 
termine a cause wrongly; but while he yet 
hung on the cross, Darius bethought him that 
the good deeds of Sandoces towards the king’s 
house were more numerous than his evil deeds; 
and so, confessing that he had acted with more 
haste than wisdom, he ordered him to he taken 
down and set at large. Thus Sandoces escaped 
destruction at the hands of Darius, and was 
alive at this time; but he was not fated to come 
off so cheaply from his second peril; for as soon 
as the Greeks saw the ships making towards 
them, they guessed their mistake, and put¬ 
ting to sea, took them without difEculty. 

195. Ariddlis, tyrant of Alabanda in Caria, 
was on board one of the ships, and was made 
prisoner; as also was the Paphian general, Pen- 
thylus, the son of Demonoiis, who was on 
board another. This person had brought with 
him twelve ships from Paphos, and, after los¬ 
ing eleven in the storm off Sepias, was taken 
in the remaining one as he sailed towards Ar- 
temisium. The Greeks, after questioning their 
prisoners as much as they wished concerning 
the forces of Xerxes, sent them away in chains 
to the Isthmus of Corinth. 

I 196. The sea force of the barbarians, with 
• ! the exception of the fifteen ships commanded 
(as I said) by Sandoces, came safe to Aphetae. 
Xerxes meanwhile, with the land army, had 
1 proceeded through Thessaly and Achaea, and 
s three days earlier, had entered the territory of 
t the Malians. In Thessaly, he matched his own 
e horses against the Thessalian, which he heard 
It were the best in Greece, but the Greek coursers 

i were left far behind in the race. All the rivers 

1. in this region had water enough to supply his 
t I army, except only the Onochonus; but in Ach¬ 


aea, the largest of the streams, the Apidanus, 
barely held out. 

197. On his arrival at Alus in Achaea, his 
guides, wishing to inform him of everything, 
told him the tale known to the dwellers in those 
parts concerning the temple of the Laphystian 
Jupiter—how that Athamas the son of /Eolus 
took counsel with Ino and plotted the death of 
Phrixus; and how that afterwards the Achae- 
ans, warned by an oracle, laid a forfeit upon 
his posterity, forbidding the eldest of the race 
ever to enter into the court-house (which they 
call the people’s house), and keeping watch 
themselves to see the law obeyed. If one comes 
within the doors, he can never go out again 
except to be sacrificed. Further, they told him 
how that many persons, when on the point of 
being slain, are seized with such fear that they 
flee away and take reiuge in some other coun¬ 
try; and that these, if they come hack long af¬ 
terwards, and are tound to be the persons who 
entered the court-house, are led forth covered 
with chaplets, and in a grand procession, and 
are sacrificed. This forfeit is paid by the de¬ 
scendants of Cytissorus the son of Phrixus, be¬ 
cause, when the Acha’ans, in obedience to an 
oracle, made Athamas the son of /Eolus their 
sin-offering, and were about to slay him, Cytis¬ 
sorus came from .Ta in Colchis and rescued 
Athamus; by which deed he brought the anger 
of the god up>on his own posterity. Xerxes, 
therefore, having heard this story, when he 
reached the grove of the god, avoided it, and 
commanded his army to do the like. He also 
paid the same respect to the house and pre¬ 
cinct of the descendants of Athamas. 

198. Such were the doing of Xerxes in Thes¬ 
saly and in /KcheXa. From hence he passed on 
into Malis, along the shores of a bay, in which 
there is an ebb and flow of the tide daily. By 
the side of this bay lies a piece of flat land, in 
one part broad, but in another very narrow in¬ 
deed, around which runs a range of lofty hills, 
impossible to climb, enclosing all Malis within 
them, and called the Trachinian cliffs. The 
first city upon the bay, as you come from 
Acha:a, is Anticyra, near which the river Sper- 
cheius, flowing down from the country of the 
Enianians, empties itself into the sea. About 
twenty furlongs from this stream there is a 
second river, called the Dyras, which is said to 
have appeared first to help Hercules when he 
was burning. Again, at the distance of twenty 
furlongs, there is a stream called the Melas, 
near which, within about five furlongs, stands 
the city of Trachis. 




252 

199* At the point where this city is built, the 
plain between the hills and the sea is broader 
than at any other, for it there measures 22,000 
plethra 2 South of Trachis there is a cleft in 
the mountain-range which shuts in the terri¬ 
tory of Trachinia; and the river Asopus issu¬ 
ing from this cleft flows for a while along the 
foot of the hills. 

200. Further to the south, another river, 
called the Phoenix, which has no great body of 
water, flows from the same hills, and falls into 
the Asopus. Here is the narrowest place of all; 
for in this part there is only a causeway wide 
enough for a single carriage. From the river 
Phoenix to Thermopylae is a distance of fifteen 
furlongs; and in this space is situate the village 
called Anthela, which the river Asopus passes 
ere it reaches the sea. The space about Anthela 
is of some width, and contains a temple of Am- 
phictyonian Ceres, as well as the seats of the 
Amphictyonic deputies, and a temple of Am- 
phictyon himself. 

201. King Xerxes pitched his camp in the 
region of Malis called Trachinia, while on 
their side the Greeks occupied the straits. 
These straits the Greeks in general call Ther¬ 
mopylae (the Hot Gates); but the natives, and 
those who dwell in the neighbourhood, call 
them Pylae (the Gates). Here then the two ar¬ 
mies took their stand; the one master of all the 
region lying north of Trachis, the other of the 
country extending southward of that place to 
the verge of the continent. 

202. The Greeks who at this spot awaited 
the coming of Xerxes were the following:— 
From Sparta, three hundred men-at-arms; 
from Arcadia, a thousand Tegeans and Man- 
tineans, five hundred of each people; a hun¬ 
dred and twenty Orchomenians, from the Ar¬ 
cadian Orchomenus; and a thousand from 
other cities: from Corinth, four hundred men; 
from Phlius, two hundred; and from Mycenjc 
eighty. Such was the number from the Pelo- 
ponnese. There were also present, from Bceo- 
tia, seven hundred Thespians and four hun¬ 
dred Thebans. 

203. Besides these troops, the Locrians of 
Opus and the Phocians had obeyed the call of 
their countrymen, and sent, the former all the 
force they had, the latter a thousand men. For 
envoys had gone from the Greeks at Ther¬ 
mopylae among the Locrians and Phocians, to 
call on them for assistance, and to say—“They 

^Herodotus is probably using the plethron as a 
square measure, making here a total of about 
5,000 acres. 


[Book vii 

were themselves but the vanguard of the host, 
sent to precede the main body, which might 
every day be expected to follow them. The sea 
was in good keeping, watched by the Atheni¬ 
ans, the Eginetans, and the rest of the fleet. 
There was no cause why they should fear; for 
after all the invader was not a god but a man; 
and there never had been, and never would be, 
a man who was not liable to misfortunes from 
the very day of his birth, and those misfortunes 
greater in proportion to his own greatness. The 
assailant therefore, being only a mortal, must 
needs fall from his glory.” Thus urged, the 
Locrians and the Phocians had come with their 
troops to Trachis. 

204. The various nations had each captains 
of their own under whom they served; but the 
one to whom all especially looked up, and who 
had the command of the entire force, was the 
Lacedaemonian, Leonidas. Now Leonidas was 
the son of Anaxandridas, who was the son of 
Leo, who was the son of Eurycratidas, who 
was the son of Anaxander, who was the son 
of Eurycrates, who was the son of Polydorus, 
who was the son of Alcamenes, who was the 
son of Telecles, who was the son of Archelaiis, 
who was the son of Agesilaiis, who was the 
son of Doryssus, who was the son of Labotas, 
who was the son of Echestratus, who was the 
son of Agis, who was the son of Eurysthenes, 
who was the son of Aristodemus, who was the 
son of Aristomachus, who was the son of Cleo- 
daeus, who was the son of Hyllus, who was the 
son of Hercules. 

Leonidas had come to be king of Sparta 
quite unexpectedly. 

205. Having two elder brothers, Cleomenes 
and Dorieus, he had no thought of ever 
mounting the throne. However, when Cleo¬ 
menes died without male oflispring, as Dorieus 
was likewise deceased, having perished in Sic¬ 
ily, the crown fell to Leonidas, who was older 
than Cleombrotus, the youngest of the sons of 
Anaxandridas, and, moreover, was married to 
the daughter of Cleomenes. He had now come 
to Thermopylae, accompanied by the three 
hundred men which the law assigned him, 
whom he had himself chosen from among the 
citizens, and who were all of them fathers with 
sons living. On his way he had taken the 
troops from Thebes, whose number I have al¬ 
ready mentioned, and who were under the 
command of Leontiades the son of Eurymach- 
us. The reason why he made a point of taking 
troops from Thebes, and Thebes only, was 
that the Thebans were strongly suspected of 


HERODOTUS 



199-210 1 

being well inclined to the Medes. Leonidas 
therefore called on them to come with him to 
the war, wishing to see whether they would 
comply with his demand, or openly refuse, and 
disclaim the Greek alliance. They, however, 
though their wishes leant the other way, nev¬ 
ertheless sent the men. 

206. The force with Leonidas was sent for¬ 
ward by the Spartans in advance of their main 
body, that the sight of them might encourage 
the allies to fight, and hinder them from going 
over to the Medes, as it was likely they might 
have done had they seen that Sparta was back¬ 
ward. They intended presently, when they had 
celebrated the Carneian festival, which was 
what now kept them at home, to leave a garri¬ 
son in Sparta, and hasten in full force to join 
the army. The rest of the allies also intended 
to act similarly; for it happened that the Olym¬ 
pic festival fell exactly at this same period. 
None of them looked to see the contest at 
Thermopylae decided so speedily; wherefore 
they were content to send forward a mere ad¬ 
vanced guard. Such accordingly were the in¬ 
tentions of the allies. 

207. The Greek forces at Thermopylx, 
when the Persian army drew near to the en¬ 
trance of the pass, were seized with fear; and 
a council was held to consider about a retreat. 
It was the wish of the Peloponnesians general¬ 
ly that the army should fall back upon the 
Peloponnese, and there guard the Isthmus. But 
Leonidas, who saw with what indignation the 
Phocians and Locrians heard of this plan, 

; gave his voice for remaining where they were, 
while they sent envoys to the several cities 
to ask for help, since they were too few to 
make a stand against an army like that of the 
Medes. 

208. While this debate was going on, Xer¬ 
xes sent a mounted spy to observe the Greeks, 
and note how many they were, and see what 
they were doing. He had heard, before he 
came out of Thessaly, that a few men were as¬ 
sembled at this place, and that at their head 
were certain Lacedaemonians, under Leonidas, 
a descendant of Hercules. The horseman rode 
up to the camp, and looked about him, but did 
not see the whole army; for such as were on 
the further side of the wall (which had been 
rebuilt and was now carefully guarded) it was 
not possible for him to behold; but he observed 

I those on the outside, who were encamped in 

! front of the rampart. It chanced that at this 

I time the Lacedaemonians held the outer guard, 

j and were seen by the spy, some of them en- 


253 

gaged in gymnastic exercises, others combing 
their long hair. At this the spy greatly mar¬ 
velled, but he counted their number, and when 
he had taken accurate note of everything, he 
rode back quietly; for no one pursued after 
him, nor paid any heed to his visit. So he re¬ 
turned, and told Xerxes all that he had seen. 

209. Upon this, Xerxes, who had no means 
of surmising the truth—namely, that the Spar¬ 
tans were preparing to do or die manfully— 
but thought it laughable that they should be 
engaged in such employments, sent and called 
to his presence Demaratus the son of Ariston, 
who still remained with the army. When he 
appeared, Xerxes told him all that he had 
heard, and questioned him concerning the 
news, since he was anxious to understand the 
meaning of such behaviour on the part of the 
Spartans. Then Demaratus said— 

“I spake to thee, O king! concerning these 
men long since, when we had but just begun 
our march upon Greece; thou, however, didst 
only laugh at my words, when I told thee of 
all this, which I saw would come to pass. Earn¬ 
estly do I struggle at all times to speak truth 
to thee, sire; and now listen to it once more. 
These men have come to dispute the pass with 
us; and it is for this that they are now making 
ready. ’Tis their custom, when they are about 
to hazard their lives, to adorn their heads with 
care. Be assured, however, that if thou canst 
subdue the men who are here and the Lacedae¬ 
monians who remain in Sparta, there is no 
other nation in all the world which will ven¬ 
ture to lift a hand in their defence. Thou hast 
now to deal with the first kingdom and town 
in Greece, and with the bravest men.” 

Then Xerxes, to whom what Demaratus 
said seemed altogether to surpass belief, asked 
further “how it was possible for so small an 
army to contend with his?” 

“O king!” Demaratus answered, “let me be 
treated as a liar, if matters fall not out as I say.” 

210. But Xerxes was not persuaded any the 
more. Four whole days he suffered to go by, 
expecting that the Greeks would run away. 
When, however, he found on the fifth that 
they were not gone, thinking that their firm 
stand was mere impudence and recklessness, 
he grew wroth, and sent against them the 
Medes and Cissians, with orders to take them 
alive and bring them into his presence. Then 
the Medes rushed forward and charged the 
Greeks, but fell in vast numbers: others how¬ 
ever took the places of the slain, and would 
not be beaten off, though they suffered terrible 


THE HISTORY 


I 




254 

losses. In this way it became clear to all, and 
especially to the king, that though he had plen¬ 
ty of combatants, he had but very few warri¬ 
ors. The struggle, however, continued during 
the whole day. 

211. Then the Medes, having met so rough 
a reception, withdrew from the bght; and their 
place was taken by the band of Persians under 
Hydarnes, whom the king called his “Im¬ 
mortals”: they, it was thought, would soon 
finish the business. But when they joined bat¬ 
tle with the Greeks, ’twas with no better suc¬ 
cess than the Median detachment—things 
went much as before—the two armies fighting 
in a narrow space, and the barbarians using 
shorter spears than the Greeks, and having no 
advantage from their numbers. The Lacedae¬ 
monians fought in a way worthy of note, and 
showed themselves far more skilful in fight 
than their adversaries, often turning their 
backs, and making as though they were all 
flying away, on which the barbarians would 
rush after them with much noise and shouting, 
when the Spartans at their approach would 
wheel round and face their pursuers, in this 
way destroying vast numbers of the enemy. 
Some Spartans likewise fell in these encoun¬ 
ters, but only a very few. At last the Persians, 
finding that all their efforts to gain the pass 
availed nothing, and that, whether they at¬ 
tacked by divisions or in any other way, it was 
to no purpose, withdrew to their own quarters. 

212. During these assaults, it is said that 
Xerxes, who was watching the battle, thrice 
leaped from the throne on which he sate, in 
terror for his army. 

Next day the combat was renewed, but with 
no better success on the part of the barbarians. 
The Greeks were so few that the barbarians 
hoped to find them disabled, by reason of their 
wounds, from offering any further resistance; 
and so they once more attacked them. But the 
Greeks were drawn up in detachments accord¬ 
ing to their cities, and bore the brunt of the 
battle in turns—all except the Phocians, who 
had been stationed on the mountain to guard 
the pathway. So, when the Persians found no 
difference between that day and the preced¬ 
ing, they again retired to their quarters. 

213. Now, as the king was in great strait, 
and knew not how he should deal with the 
emergency, Ephialtes, the son of Eurydemus, 
a man of Malis, came to him and was admitted 
to a conference. Stirred by the hope of receiv¬ 
ing a rich reward at the king’s hands, he had 
come to tell him of the pathway which led 


[ Book vii 

across the mountain to Thermopylae; by which 
disclosure he brought destruction on the band 
of Greeks who had there withstood the bar¬ 
barians. This Ephialtes afterwards, from fear 
of the Lacedemonians, fled into Thessaly; and 
during his exile, in an assembly of the Am- 
phictyons held at Pyle, a price was set upon 
his head by the Pylagore. When some time 
had gone by, he returned from exile, and went 
to Anticyra, where he was slain by Athenades, 
a native of Trachis. Athenades did not slay 
him for his treachery, but for another reason, 
which I shall mention in a later part of my his¬ 
tory: yet still the Lacedaemonians honoured 
him none the less. Thus then did Ephialtes 
perish a long time afterwards. 

214. Besides this there is another story told, 
which I do not at all believe—to wit, that One- 
tas the son of Phanagoras, a native of Carystus, 
and Corydallus, a man of Anticyra, were the 
persons who spoke on this matter to the king, 
and took the Persians across the mountain. 
One may guess which story is true, from the 
fact that the deputies of the Greeks, the Pyla- 
gorac, who must have had the best means of 
ascertaining the truth, did not offer the reward 
for the heads of Onetas and Corydallus, but 
for that of Ephialtes of Trachis; and again 
from the flight of Ephialtes, which we know 
to have been on this account. Onetas, I allow, 
although he was not a Malian, might have 
been acquainted with the path, if he had lived 
much in that part of the country; but as Ephi¬ 
altes was the person who actually led the Per¬ 
sians round the mountain by the pathway, I 
leave his name on record as that of the man 
who did the deed. 

215. Great was the joy of Xerxes on this oc¬ 
casion; and as he approved highly of the en¬ 
terprise which Ephialtes undertook to accom¬ 
plish, he forthwith sent upon the errand Hy¬ 
darnes, and the Persians under him. The 
troops left the camp about the time of the 
lighting of the lamps. The pathway along 
which they went was first discovered by the 
Malians of these parts, who soon afterwards 
led the Thessalians by it to attack the Phocians, 
at the time when the Phocians fortified the 
pass with a wall, and so put themselves under 
covert from danger. And ever since, the path 
has always been put to an ill use by the 
Malians. 

216. The course which it takes is the follow¬ 
ing:—Beginning at the Asopus, where that 
stream flows through the cleft in the hills, it 
runs along the ridge of the mountain (which 


HERODOTUS 





THE HISTORY 255 


is called, like tht pathway over it, Anopxa), 
and ends at the city of Alpenus—the first Lo- 
crian town as you come from Malis—by the 
stone called Melampygus and the seats of the 
Cercopians. Here it is as narrow as at any other 
point. 

217. The Persians took this path, and, cross¬ 
ing the Asopus, continued their march 
through the whole of the night, having the 
mountains of CEta on their right hand, and on 
their left those of Trachis. At dawn of day 
they found themselves close to the summit. 
Now the hill was guarded, as I have already 
said, by a thousand Phocian men-at-arms, who 
were placed there to defend the pathway, and 
at the same time to secure their own country. 
They had been given the guard of the moun¬ 
tain path, while the other Greeks defended the 
pass below, because they had volunteered tor 
the service, and had pledged themselves to Le¬ 
onidas to maintain the post. 

218. The ascent of the Persians became 
known to the Phocians in the following man¬ 
ner:—During all the time that they were 
making their way up, the Greeks remained un¬ 
conscious of it, inasmuch as the whole moun¬ 
tain was covered with groves ot oak; but it 
happened that the air was very still, and the 
leaves which the Persians stirred with their 
feet made, as it was likely they would, a loud 
rustling, whereupon the Phocians jumped up 
and flew to seize their arms. In a moment the 
barbarians came in sight, and, perceiving men 
arming themselves, were greatly amazed; for 
they had fallen in with an enemy when they 
expected no opposition. Hydarnes, alarmed at 
the sight, and fearing lesrthe Phocians might 
be Laceda:monians, inquired of Ephialtes to 
what nation these troops belonged. Ephialtes 
told him the exact truth, whereupon he ar¬ 
rayed his Persians for battle. The Phocians, 
galled by the showers of arrows to which they 
were exposed, and imagining themselves the 
special object of the Persian attack, fled hastily 
to the crest of the mountain, and there made 
ready to meet death; but while their mistake 
continued, the Persians, with Ephialtes and 
Hydarnes, not thinking it worth their while 
to delay on account of Phocians, passed on and 
descended the mountain with all possible 
speed. 

219. The Greeks at Thermopylae received 
the first warning of the destruction which the 
dawn would bring on them from the seer 
Megistias, who read their fate in the victims 
as he was sacrificing. After this deserters came 


in, and brought the news that the Persians 
were marching round by the hills: it was still 
night when these men arrived. Last of all, the 
scouts came running down from the heights, 
and brought in the same accounts, when the 
day was just beginning to break. Then the 
Greeks held a council to consider what they 
should do, and here opinions were divided: 
some were strong against quitting their post, 
while others contended to the contrary. So 
when the council had broken up, part of the 
troops departed and went their ways home¬ 
ward to their several states; part however re¬ 
solved to remain, and to stand by Leonidas to 
the last. 

220. It is said that Leonidas himself sent 
away the troops who departed, because he ten¬ 
dered their safety, but thought it unseemly 
that either he or his Spartans should quit the 
post which they had been especially sent to 
guard. For my own part, I incline to think that 
Leonidas gave the order, because he perceived 
the allies to be out of heart and unwilling to 
encounter the danger to which his own mind 
was made up. He therefore commanded them 
to retreat, but said that he himself could not 
draw back with honour; knowing that, if he 
stayed, glory awaited him, and that Sparta in 
that case vv'ould not lose her prosperity. For 
when the Spartans, at the very beginning of 
the war, sent to consult the oracle concerning 
it, the answer which they received from the 
Pythoness was “that either Sparta must be ov¬ 
erthrown by the barbarians, or one of her 
kings must perish.” The prophecy was deliv¬ 
ered in hexameter verse, and ran thus:— 

O ye men who dwell in the streets of broad Lace- 
das mo n\ 

Either your glorious town shall be sacked by the 
children of Perseus, 

Or, in exchange, must all through the whole Lac¬ 
onian country 

Mourn for the loss of a descendant of great 
Heracles. 

He cannot be withstood by the courage of bulls 
nor of lions, 

Strive as they may; he is mighty as fove; there is 
nought that shall stay him, 

Till he have got for his prey your king, or your 
glorious city. 

The remembrance of this answer, I think, and 
the wish to secure the whole glory for the 
Spartans, caused Leonidas to send the allies 
away. This is more likely than that they quar¬ 
relled with him, and took their departure in 
such unruly fashion. 

221. To me it seems no small argument in 


256 HERODOTUS Book vii 


favour of this view, that the seer also who ac¬ 
companied the army, Megistias, the Acarnani- 
an—said to have been of the blood of Melam- 
pus, and the same who was led by the appear¬ 
ance of the victims to warn the Greeks of the 
danger which threatened them—received or¬ 
ders to retire (as it is certain he did) from 
Leonidas, that he might escape the coming de¬ 
struction. Megistias, however, though bidden 
to depart, refused, and stayed with the army; 
but he had an only son present with the ex¬ 
pedition, whom he now sent away. 

222. So the allies, when Leonidas ordered 
them to retire, obeyed him and forthwith de¬ 
parted. Only the Thespians and the Thebans 
remained with the Spartans; and of these the 
Thebans were kept back by Leonidas as hos¬ 
tages, very much against their will. The Thes¬ 
pians, on the contrary, stayed entirely of their 
own accord, refusing to retreat, and declaring 
that they would not forsake Leonidas and his 
followers. So they abode with the Spartans, 
and died with them. Their leader was De- 
mophilus, the son of Diadromes. 

223. At sunrise Xerxes made libations, after 
which he waited until the time when the forum 
is wont to fill, and then began his advance. 
Ephialtes had instructed him thus, as the de¬ 
scent of the mountain is much quicker, and 
the distance much shorter, than the way round 
the hills, and the ascent. So the barbarians 
under Xerxes began to draw nigh; and the 
Greeks under Leonidas, as they now went 
forth determined to die, advanced much fur¬ 
ther than on previous days, until they reached 
the more open portion of the pass. Hitherto 
they had held their station within the wall, and 
from this had gone forth to fight at the point 
where the pass was the narrowest. Now they 
joined battle beyond the defile, and carried 
slaughter among the barbarians, who fell in 
heaps. Behind them the captains of the squad¬ 
rons, armed with whips, urged their men for¬ 
ward with continual blows. Many were thrust 
into the sea, and there perished; a still greater 
number were trampled to death by their own 
soldiers; no one heeded the dying. For the 
Greeks, reckless of their own safety and des¬ 
perate, since they knew that, as the mountain 
had been crossed, their destruction was nigh 
at hand, exerted themselves with the most furi¬ 
ous valour against the barbarians. 

224. By this time the spears of the greater 
number were all shivered, and with their 
swords they hewed down the ranks of the Per¬ 
sians; and here, as they strove, Leonidas fell 


fighting bravely, together with many other 
famous Spartans, whose names I have taken 
care to learn on account of their great worthi¬ 
ness, as indeed I have those of all the three hun¬ 
dred. There fell too at the same time very 
many famous Persians: among them, two sons 
of Darius, Abrocomes and Hyperanthes, his 
children by Phratagune, the daughter of Ar- 
tanes. Artanes was brother of King Darius, be¬ 
ing a son of Hystaspes, the son of Arsames; 
and when he gave his daughter to the king, 
he made him heir likewise of all his substance; 
for she was his only child. 

225. Thus two brothers of Xerxes here 
fought and fell. And now there arose a fierce 
struggle between the Persians and the Lacedae¬ 
monians over the body of Leonidas, in which 
the Greeks four times drove back the enemy, 
and at last by their great bravery succeeded in 
bearing off the body. This combat was scarcely 
ended when the Persians with Ephialtes ap¬ 
proached; and the Greeks, informed that they 
drew nigh, made a change in the manner of 
their fighting. Drawing back into the narrow¬ 
est part of the pass, and retreating even behind 
the cross wall, they posted themselves upon a 
hillock, where they stood all drawn up together 
in one close body, except only the Thebans. 
The hillock whereof I speak is at the entrance 
of the straits, where the stone lion stands 
which was set up in honour of Leonidas. Here 
they defended themselves to the last, such as 
still had swords using them, and the others re¬ 
sisting with their hands and teeth; till the bar¬ 
barians, who in part had pulled down the wall 
and attacked them in front, in part had gone 
round and now encircled them upon every side, 
overwhelmed and buried the remnant which 
was left beneath showers of missile weapons. 

226. Thus nobly did the whole body of 
Lacedaemonians and Thespians behave; but 
nevertheless one man is said to have distin¬ 
guished himself above all the rest, to wit, Di- 
eneces the Spartan. A speech which he made 
before the Greeks engaged the Medes, remains 
on record. One of the Trachinians told him, 
“Such was the number of the barbarians, that 
when they shot forth their arrows the sun 
would be darkened by their multitude.” Di- 
eneces, not at all frightened at these words, but 
making light of the Median numbers, an¬ 
swered, “Our Trachinian friend brings us ex¬ 
cellent tidings. If the Medes darken the sun, 
we shall have our fight in the shade.” Other 
sayings too of a like nature are reported to 
have been left on record by this same person. 





257 


THE HISTORY 


227. Next to him two brothers, Laceda!- 
monians, are reputed to have made themselves 
conspicuous: they were named Alpheus and 
Maro, and were the sons of Orsiphantus. 
There was also a Thespian who gained greater 
glory than any of his countrymen: he was a 
man called Dithyrambus, the son of Harma- 
tidas. 

228. The slain were buried where they fell; 
and in their honour, nor less in honour of 
those who died before Leonidas sent the allies 
away, an inscription was set up, which said:— 

Here did four thousand men from Pelops^ land 
Against three hundred myriads bravely stand. 

This was in honour of all. Another was for the 
Spartans alone:— 

Go, stranger, and to Lacedeemon tell 
That here, obeying her behests, we fell. 

This was for the Lacediemonians. The seer had 
the following:— 

The great Megistias^ tomb you here may view, 
Whom slew the Medes, fresh from Spercheius* 
fords. 

Well the wise seer the coming death foiel{new. 
Yet scorned he to forsal^e his Spartan lords. 

These inscriptions, and the pillars likewise, 
were all set up by the Amphictyons, except that 
in honour of Megistias, which was inscribed 
to him (on account of their sworn friendship) 
by Simonides, the son of Leoprepes. 

229. Two of the three hundred, it is said, 
Arlstodemus and Eurytus, having been at¬ 
tacked by a disease of the eyes, had received 
orders from Leonidas to quit the camp; and 
both lay at Alpeni in the worst stage of the 
malady. These two men might, had they been 
so minded, have agreed together to return 
alive to Sparta; or if they did not like to re¬ 
turn, they might have gone both to the field 
and fallen with their countrymen. But at this 
time, when either way was open to them, un¬ 
happily they could not agree, but took con¬ 
trary courses. Eurytus no sooner heard that the 
Persians had come round the mountain than 
straightway he called for his armour, and hav¬ 
ing buckled it on, bade his helot lead him to 
the place where his friends were fighting. The 
helot did so, and then turned and fled; but 
Eurytus plunged into the thick of the battle, 
and so perished. Aristodemus, on the other 
hand, was faint of heart, and remained at Al¬ 
peni. It is my belief that if Aristodemus only 
had been sick and returned, or if both had 
come back together, the Spartans would have 
been content and felt no anger; but when there 


were two men with the very same excuse, and 
one of them was chary of his life, while the 
other freely gave it, they could not but be very 
wroth with the former. 

230. This is the account which some give 
of the escape of Aristodemus. Others say that 
he, with another, had been sent on a message 
from the army, and, having it in his power to 
return in time for the battle, purposely loitered 
on the road, and so survived his comrades; 
while his fellow-messenger came back in time, 
and fell in the battle. 

231. When Aristodemus returned to Lace- 
da:mon, reproach and disgrace awaited him; 
disgrace, inasmuch as no Spartan would give 
him a light to kindle his fire, or so much as ad¬ 
dress a word to him; and reproach, since all 
spoke of him as “the craven.” However he 
wiped away all his shame afterwards at the 
battle of Plataca. 

232. Another of the three hundred is like¬ 
wise said to have survived the battle, a man 
named Pantites, whom Leonidas had sent on 
an embassy into Thessaly. He, they say, on his 
return to Sparta, found himself in such dises- 
teem that he hanged himself. 

233. The Thebans under the command of 
Leontiades remained with the Greeks, and 
fought against the barbarians, only so long as 
necessity compelled them. No sooner did they 
see victory inclining to the Persians, and the 
Greeks under Leonidas hurrying with all 
speed towards the hillock, than they moved 
away from their companions, and with hands 
upraised advanced towards the barbarians, ex¬ 
claiming, as was indeed most true—“that they 
for their part wished well to the Medes, and 
had been among the first to give earth and 
water to the king; force alone had brought 
them to Thermopylae; and so they must not be 
blamed for the slaughter which had befallen 
the king’s army.” These words, the truth of 
which was attested by the Thessalians, sufficed 
to obtain the Thebans the grant of their lives. 
However, their good fortune was not without 
some drawback; for several of them were slain 
by the barbarians on their first approach; and 
the rest, who were the greater number, had 
the rpyal mark branded upon their bodies by 
the command of Xerxes—Leontiades, their 
captain, being the first to suffer. (This man’s 
son, Eurymachus, was afterwards slain by the 
Plataeans, when he came with a band of 400 
Thebans, and seized their city.) 

234. Thus fought the Greeks at Thermopy¬ 
lae. And Xerxes, after the fight was over, called 


258 HERODOTUS [Book vii 


for Demaratus to question him; and began as 
follows:— 

“Demaratus, thou art a worthy man; thy 
true-speaking proves it. All has happened as 
thou didst forewarn. Now then, tell me, how 
many Lacedemonians are there left, and of 
those left how many are such brave warriors 
as these? Or are they all alike?” 

“O king!” replied the other, “the whole 
number of the Lacedemonians is very great; 
and many are the cities which they inhabit. 
But I will tell thee what thou really wishest to 
learn. There is a town of Lacedemon called 
Sparta, which contains within it about eight 
thousand full-grown men. They are, one and 
all, equal to those who have fought here. The 
other Lacedemonians are brave men, but not 
such warriors as these.” 

“Tell me now, Demaratus,” rejoined Xer¬ 
xes, “how we may with least trouble subdue 
these men. Thou must know all the paths of 
their counsels, as thou wert once their king.” 

235. Then Demaratus answered—“O king! 
since thou askest my advice so earnestly, it is 
fitting that I should inform thee what I con¬ 
sider to be the best course. Detach three hun¬ 
dred vessels from the body of thy fleet, and 
send them to attack the shores of Laconia. 
There is an i.sland called Cythera in those 
parts, not far from the coast, concerning which 
Chilon, one of our wisest men, made the re¬ 
mark that Sparta would gain if it were sunk to 
the bottom of the sea—so constantly did he ex¬ 
pect that it would give occasion to some proj¬ 
ect like that which I now recommend to thee. 
I mean not to say that he had a foreknowledge 
of thy attack upon Greece; but in truth he 
feared all armaments. Send thy ships then to 
this island, and thence affright the Spartans. 
If once they have a war of their own close to 
their doors, fear not their giving any help to 
the rest of the Greeks while thy land force is 
engaged in conquering them. In this way may 
all Greece be subdued; and then Sparta, left 
to herself, will be powerless. But if thou wilt 
not take this advice, I will tell thee what thou 
mayest look to see. When thou comest to the 
Peloponnese, thou wilt find a narrow neck of 
land, where all the Peloponnesians who are 
leagued against thee will be gathered together; 
and there thou wilt have to fight bloodier bat¬ 
tles than any which thou hast yet witnessed. If, 
however, thou wilt follow my plan, the Isth¬ 
mus and the cities of Peloponnese will yield to 
thee without a battle.” 

236. Achaemenes, who was present, now 


took the word, and spoke—he was brother to 
Xerxes, and, having the command of the fleet, 
feared lest Xerxes might be prevailed upon to 
do as Demaratus advised— 

“I perceive, O king” (he said), “that thou I 
art listening to the words of a man who is en- • 
vious of thy good fortune, and seeks to betray | 
thy cause. This is indeed the common temper 
of the Grecian people—they envy good for¬ 
tune, and hate power greater than their own. 

If in this posture of our affairs, after we have 
lost four hundred vessels by shipwreck, three 
hundred more be sent away to make a voyage 
round the Peloponnese, our enemies will be¬ 
come a match for us. But let us keep our whole 
fleet in one body, and it will be dangerous for 
them to venture on an attack, as they will cer¬ 
tainly be no match for us then. Besides, while 
our sea and land forces advance together, the 
fleet and army can each help the other; but if 
they be parted, no aid will come either from 
thee to the fleet, or from the fleet to thee. Only 
order thy own matters well, and trouble not 
thyself to inquire concerning the enemy— • 
where they will fight, or what they will do, or ; 
how many they are. Surely they can manage 
their own concerns without us, as we can ours 
without them. If the Lacedaemonians come 
out against the Persians to battle, they wdll 1 
scarce repair the disaster which has befallen 1 
them now.” 

237. Xerxes replied—“Achaemenes, thy 

counsel pleases me W'ell, and I will do as thou r 
sayest. But Demaratus advised what he 1 
thought best—only his judgment was not so r 
good as thine. Never wdll I believe that he does I 
not wish well to my cause; for that is dis- I 
proved both by his former counsels, and also || 
by the circumstances of the case. A citizen does I 
indeed envy any fellow-citizen who is more 0 
lucky than himself, and often hates him se- ■ 
cretly; if such a man be called on for counsel, ■ 
he will not give his best thoughts, unless in¬ 
deed he be a man of very exalted virtue; and 
such are but rarely found. But a friend of an- a 
other country delights in the good fortune of 
his foreign bond-friend, and will give him, ' 
when asked, the best advice in his power. : 
Therefore I warn all men to abstain henceforth [ 
from speaking ill of Demaratus, who is my i 
bond-friend.” | 

238. When Xerxes had thus spoken, he pro- I 
ceeded to pass through the slain; and finding ' 
the body of Leonidas, whom he knew to have 
been the Lacedaemonian king and captain, he 
ordered that the head should be struck ofi, i 






235 - 239 ] the history 259 


and the trunk fastened to a cross. This proves 
to me most clearly, what is plain also in many 
other ways—namely, that King Xerxes was 
more angry with Leonidas, while he was still 
in life, than with any other mortal. Certes, he 
would not else have used his body so shame¬ 
fully. For the Persians are wont to honour 
those who show themselves valiant in fight 
more highly than any nation that I know. 
They, however, to whom the orders were giv¬ 
en, did according to the commands of the 
king. 

239. I return now to a point in my History, 
which at the time I left incomplete. The La¬ 
cedaemonians were the first of the Greeks to 
hear of the king’s design against their country; 
and it was at this time that they sent to con¬ 
sult the Delphic oracle, and received the an¬ 
swer of which I spoke a while ago. The dis¬ 
covery was made to them in a very strange 
way. Demaratus, the son of Ariston, after he 
took refuge with the Medes, was not, in my 
judgment, which is supported by probability, 
a well-wisher to the Lacedaemonians. It may 
be questioned, therefore, whether he did what 
I am about to mention from good-will or from 
insolent triumph. It happened that he was at 


Susa at the time when Xerxes determined to 
lead his army into Greece; and in this way 
becoming acquainted with his design, he re¬ 
solved to send tidings of it to Sparta. So as 
there was no other way of effecting his pur¬ 
pose, since the danger of being discovered was 
great, Demaratus framed the following con¬ 
trivance. He took a pair of tablets, and, clear¬ 
ing the wax away from them, wrote what the 
king was purposing to do upon the wood 
whereof the tablets were made; having done 
this, he spread the wax once more over the 
writing, and so sent It. By these means, the 
guards placed to watch the roads, observing 
nothing but a blank tablet, were sure to give 
no trouble to the bearer. When the tablet 
reached Lacedaemon, there was no one, I un¬ 
derstand, who could find out the secret, till 
Gorgo, the daughter of Cleomenes and wife of 
Leonidas, discovered it, and told the others. 
“If they would scrape the wax off the tablet,” 
she said, “they would be sure to find the writ¬ 
ing u|X)n the wood.” The Lacedemonians took 
her advice, found the writing, and read it; after 
which they sent it round to the other Greeks. 
Such then is the account which is given of this 
matter. 